JOHN M. KELLY LIBRARY 




Donated by 

The Redemptorists of 
the Toronto Province 

from the Library Collection of 
Holy Redeemer College, Windsor 



University of 
St. Michael's College, Toronto 



HOLY RBOEEMEK 











THE IDEA OF A UNIVERSITY 



THE IDEA OF A UNIVERSITY 

DEFINED AND ILLUSTRATED 

I. IN NINE DISCOURSES DELIVERED TO THE CATHOLICS OF 
DUBLIN 

I. IN OCCASIONAL LECTURES AND ESSAYS ADDRESSED TO THE 
MEMBERS OF THE CATHOLIC UNIVERSITY 



BY 



JOHN HENRY CARDINAL NEWMAN 



NEW FMPRESSIOX 




LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO. 

39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON 

NEW YORK AND BOMBAY 4. 

i go I <J- 

.4* 




I'U: l^ \ : ' ; 



Hospes eram, et colkgistis Me. 



IN GRATEFUL NEVER-DYING REMEMBRANCE 
OF HIS MANY FRIENDS AND BENEFACTORS, 

LIVING AND DEAD, 
AT HOME AND ABROAD 

IN GREAT BRITAIN IRELAND, FRANCE, 
IN BELGIUM, GERMANY, POLAND, ITALY, AND MALTA, 

IN NORTH AMERICA, AND OTHER COUNTRIES, 

WHO, BY THEIR RESOLUTE PRAYERS AND PENANCE, 

AND BY THEIR GENEROUS STUBBORN EFFORTS 

AND BY THEIR MUNIFICENT ALMS, 

HAVE BROKEN FOR HIM 

I i [ ,,| i, 




PREFACE. 



THE view taken of a University in these Discourses 
is the following : That it is a place of teaching 
universal knowledge. This implies that its object is, on 
the one hand, intellectual, not moral ; and, on the other, 
that it is the diffusion and extension of knowledge rather 
than the advancement. If its object were scientific and 
philosophical discovery, I do not see why a University 
should have students ; if religious training, I do not see 
how it can be the seat of literature and science. 

Such is a University in its essence, and independently 
of its relation to the Church. But, practically speaking, 
it cannot fulfil its object duly, such as I have described 
it, without the Church's assistance ; or, to use the theo 
logical term, the Church is necessary for its integrity. 
Not that its main characters are changed by this incor 
poration : it still has the office of intellectual education ; 
but the Church steadies it in the performance of that 
office. 

Such are the main principles of the Discourses which 
follow ; though it would be unreasonable for me to ex 
pect that I have treated so large and important a field 
of thought with the fulness and precision necessary to 
secure me from incidental misconceptions of my meaning 
on the part of the reader. It is true, there is nothing 



X Preface. 

novel or singular in the argument which I have been 
pursuing, but this does not protect me from such mis 
conceptions ; for the very circumstance that the views I 
have been delineating are not original with me may lead 
to false notions as t<3 my relations in opinion towards 
those from whom I happened in the first instance to 
learn them, and may cause me to be interpreted by the 
objects or sentiments of schools to which I should be 
simply opposed. 

ror instance, some persons may be tempted to com 
plain, that I have servilely followed the English idea of 
a University, to the disparagement of that Knowledge 
which I profess to be so strenuously upholding ; and 
they may anticipate that an academical system, formed 
upon my model, will result in nothing better or higher 
than in the production of that antiquated variety of 
human nature and remnant of feudalism, as they consider 
it, called "a gentleman."* Now, I have anticipated this 
charge in various parts of my discussion ; if, however, 
any Catholic is found to prefer it (and to Catholics of 
course this Volume is primarily addressed), I would have 
him first of all ask himself the previous question, what 
he conceives to be the reason contemplated by the Holy 
See in recommending just now to the Irish Hierarchy 
the establishment of a Catholic University ? Has the 
Supreme Pontiff recommended it for the sake of the 
Sciences, which are to be the matter, and not rather of the 
Students, who are to be the subjects, of its teaching ? 
Has he any obligation or duty at all towards seculai 
knowledge as such ? Would it become his Apostolical 
Ministry, and his descent from the Fisherman, to have a 
zeal for the Baconian or other philosophy of man for its 

* Vid. Huber's English Universities, London, 1843, vol. ii., part i ni, 
3^i, etc. 



Preface. xi 

own sake ? Is the Vicar of Christ bound by office or by 
vow to be the preacher of the theory of gravitation, or 
a martyr for electro-magnetism ? Would he be acquit 
ting himself of the dispensation committed to him if he 
were smitten with an abstract love of these matters, how 
ever true, or beautiful, or ingenious, or useful? Or rather, 
does he not contemplate such achievements of the intel 
lect, as far as he contemplates them, solely and simply 
in their relation to the interests of Revealed Truth ? 
Surely, what he does he does for the sake of Religion ; 
if he looks with satisfaction on strong temporal govern 
ments, which promise perpetuity, it is for the sake of 
Religion ; and if he encourages and patronizes art and 
science, it is for the sake of Religion. He rejoices in 
the widest and most philosophical systems of intellectual 
education, from an intimate conviction that Truth is his 
real ally, as it is his profession ; and that Knowledge 
and Reason are sure ministers to Faith. 

This being undeniable, it is plain that, when he sug 
gests to the Irish Hierarchy the establishment of a Uni 
versity, his first and chief and direct object is, not science, 
art, professional skill, literature, the discovery of know 
ledge, but some benefit or other, to accrue, by means of 
literature and science, to his own children ; not indeed 
their formation on any narrow or fantastic type, as, for 
instance, that of an "English Gentleman" may be called, 
but their exercise and growth in certain habits, moral or 
intellectual. Nothing short of this can be his aim, if, as 
becomes the Successor of the Apostles, he is to be able 
to say with St. Paul, "Non judicavi me scire aliquid inter 
vos, nisi Jesum Christum, et hunc crucifixum." Just as 
a commander wishes to have tall and well-formed and 
vigorous soldiers, not from any abstract devotion to the 
military standard of height or age, but for the purposes 



xii Preface. 

of war, and no one thinks it any thing but natural and 
praiseworthy in him to be contemplating, not abstract 
qualities, but his own living and breathing men ; so, in 
like manner, when the Church founds a University, she 
is not cherishing talent, genius, or knowledge, for their 
own sake, but for the sake of her children, with a view to 
their spiritual welfare and their religious influence and 
usefulness, with the object of training them to fill their 
respective posts in life better, and of making them more 
intelligent, capable, active members of society. 

Nor can it justly be said that in thus acting she sacri 
fices Science, and, under a pretence of fulfilling the duties 
of her mission, perverts a University to ends not its own, 
as soon as it is taken into account that there are other 
institutions far more suited to act as instruments of 
stimulating philosophical inquiry, and extending the 
boundaries of our knowledge, than a University. Such, 
for instance, are the literary and scientific " Academies," 
which are so celebrated in Italy and France, and which 
have frequently been connected with Universities, as 
committees, or, as it were, congregations or delegacies 
subordinate to them. Thus the present Royal Society 
originated in Charles the Second's time, in Oxford; such 
just now are the Ashmolean and Architectural Societies 
in the same seat of learning, which have risen in our own 
time. Such, too, is the British Association, a migratory 
body, which at least at times is found in the halls of the 
Protestant Universities of the United Kingdom, and the 
faults of which lie, not in its exclusive devotion to science, 
but in graver matters which it is irrelevant here to enter 
upon. Such again is the Antiquarian Society, the Royal 
Academy for the Fine Arts, and others which might be 
mentioned. This, then, is the sort of institution, which 
primarily contemplates Science itself, and not students; 



Preface. xiii 

and, in thus speaking, I am saying nothing of my own, 
being supported by no less an authority than Cardinal 
Gerdil. " Ce n'est pas," he says, " qu'il y ait aucune 
veritable opposition entre 1'esprit des Academies et celui 
des University's ; ce sont seulement des vues differentes. 
Les Universites sont e*tablies pour enseigner les sciences 
aux jlh>es qui veulent s'y former ; les Academies se 
proposent de nouvelles rechercties a faire dans la carriere 
des sciences. Les Universites d'ltalie ont fourni des 
sujets qui ont fait honneur aux Academies ; et celles-ci 
ont donne" aux Universites des Professeurs, qui ont rempli 
les chaires avec la plus grande distinction."* 

The nature of the case and the history of philosophy 
combine to recommend to us this division of intellec 
tual labour between Academies and Universities. To 
discover and to teach are distinct functions ; they are 
also distinct gifts, and are not commonly found united in 
the same person. He, too, who spends his day in dispens 
ing his existing knowledge to all comers is unlikely to 
have either leisure or energy to acquire new. The com 
mon sense of mankind has associated the search after 
truth with seclusion and quiet. The greatest thinkers 
have been too intent on their subject to admit of interrup 
tion ; they have been men of absent minds and idosyn- 
cratic habits, and have, more or less, shunned the lecture 
room and the public school. Pythagoras, the light of 
Magna Graecia, lived for a time in a cave. Thales, the 
light of Ionia, lived unmarried and in private, and refused 
the invitations of princes. Plato withdrew from Athens 
to the groves of Academus. Aristotle gave twenty years 
to a studious discipleship under him. Friar Bacon lived 
in his tower upon the Isis. Newton indulged in an intense 
severity of meditation which almost shook his reason. 
* Opere, t. iii., p. 353. 



xiv Preface. 

The great discoveries in chemistry and electricity were 
not made in Universities. Observatories are more fre 
quently out of Universities than in them, and even when 
within their bounds need Jiave no moral connexion with 
them. Porson had no classes ; Elmsley lived good part 
of his life in the country. I do not say that there are 
not great examples the other way, perhaps Socrates, 
certainly Lord Bacon ; still I think it must be allowed on 
the whole that, while teaching involves external engage 
ments, the natural home for experiment and speculation 
is retirement. 

Returning, then, to the consideration of the question, 
from which I may seem to have digressed, thus much I 
think I have made good, that, whether or no a Catholic 
University should put before it, as its great object, to 
make its students "gentlemen," still to make them some 
thing or other is its great object, and not simply to pro 
tect the interests and advance the dominion of Science. 
If, then, this may be taken for granted, as I think it may, 
the only point which remains to be settled is, whether I 
have formed a probable conception of the sort of benefit 
which the Holy See has intended to confer on Catholics 
who speak the English tongue by recommending to the 
Irish Hierarchy the establishment of a University ; and 
this I now proceed to consider. 

Here, then, it is natural to ask those who are interested 
in the question, whether any better interpretation of the 
recommendation of the Holy See can be given than that 
which I have suggested in this Volume. Certainly it 
does not seem to me rash to pronounce that, whereas 
Protestants have great advantages of education in the 
Schools, Colleges, and Universities of the United King 
dom, our ecclesiastical rulers have it in purpose that 
Catholics should enjoy the like advantages, whatever they 



Preface. xv 

are, to the full. I conceive they view it as prejudicial to 
the interests of Religion that there should be any culti 
vation of mind bestowed upon Protestants which is not 
given to their own youth also. As they wish their schools 
for the poorer and middle classes to be at least on a par 
with those of Protestants, they contemplate the same ob 
ject also as regards that higher education which is given to 
comparatively the few. Protestant youths, who can spare 
the time, continue their studies till the age of twenty-one 
or twenty-two ; thus they employ a time of life all-im 
portant and especially favourable to mental culture. 1 
conceive that our Prelates are impressed with the fact 
and its consequences, that a youth who ends his educa 
tion at seventeen is no match (cateris paribus) for one 
who ends it at twenty-two. 

All classes indeed of the community are impressed 
with a fact so obvious as this. The consequence is, that 
Catholics who aspire to be on a level with Protestants in 
discipline and refinement of intellect have recourse to 
Protestant Universities to obtain what they cannot find 
at home. Assuming (as the Rescripts from Propaganda 
allow me to do) that Protestant education is inexpedient 
for our youth, we see here an additional reason why 
those advantages, whatever they are, which Protestant 
communities dispense through the medium of Protest 
antism should be accessible to Catholics in a Catholic 
form. 

What are these advantages ? I repeat, they are in one 
word the culture of the intellect. Robbed, oppressed, 
and thrust aside, Catholics in these islands have not been 
in a condition for centuries to attempt the sort of educa 
tion which is necessary for the man of the world, the 
statesman, the landholder, or the opulent gentleman. 
Their legitimate stations, duties, employments, have been 



xvi Preface. 

taken from them, and the qualifications withal, social 
and intellectual, which are necessary both for reversing 
the forfeiture and for availing themselves of the reversal. 
The time is come when* this moral disability must be 
removed. Our desideratum is, not the manners and habits 
of gentlemen ; these can be, and are, acquired in various 
other ways, by good society, by foreign travel, by the 
innate grace and dignity of the Catholic mind ; but the 
force, the steadiness, the comprehensiveness and the 
versatility of intellect, the command over our own powers, 
the instinctive just estimate of things as they pass before 
us, which sometimes indeed is a natural gift, but com 
monly is not gained without much effort and the exercise 
of years. 

This is real cultivation of mind ; and I do not deny 
that the characteristic excellences of a gentleman are 
included in it. Nor need we be ashamed that they should 
be, since the poet long ago wrote, that " Ingenuas didi- 
cisse fideliter artes Emollit mores." Certainly a liberal 
education does manifest itself in a courtesy, propriety, 
and polish of word and action, which is beautiful in itself, 
and acceptable to others ; but it does much more. It 
brings the mind into form, for the mind is like the body. 
Boys outgrow their shape and their strength ; their limbs 
have to be knit together, and their constitution needs 
tone. Mistaking animal spirits for vigour, and over 
confident in their health, ignorant what they can bear 
and how to manage themselves, they are immoderate 
and extravagant ; and fall into sharp sicknesses. This 
is an emblem of their minds ; at first they have no prin 
ciples laid down within them as a foundation for the 
intellect to build upon ; they have no discriminating con 
victions, and no grasp of consequences. And therefore 
they talk at random, if they talk much, and cannot help 



Preface. xvii 

being flippant, or what is emphatically called "young" 
They are merely dazzled by phenomena, instead of per 
ceiving things as they are. 

It were well if none remained boys all their lives ; but 
what is more common than the sight of grown men, 
talking on political or moral or religious subjects, in that 
offhand, idle way, which we signify by the word unreal? 
" That they simply do not know what they are talking 
about " is the spontaneous silent remark of any man of 
sense who hears them. Hence such persons have no 
difficulty in contradicting themselves in successive sen 
tences, without being conscious of it. Hence others, 
whose defect in intellectual training is more latent, have 
their most unfortunate crotchets, as they are called, or 
hobbies, which deprive them of the influence which their 
estimable qualities would otherwise secure. Hence others 
can never look straight before them, never see the point, 
and have no difficulties in the most difficult subjects. 
Others are hopelessly obstinate and prejudiced, and, after 
they have been driven from their opinions, return to them 
the next moment without even an attempt to explain 
why. Others are so intemperate and intractable that 
there is no greater calamity for a good cause than that 
they should get hold of it. It is very plain from the 
very particulars I have mentioned that, in this delinea 
tion of intellectual infirmities, I am drawing, not from 
Catholics, but from the world at large ; I am referring 
to an evil which is forced upon us in every railway 
carriage, in every coffee-room or table-d 'hote, in every 
mixed company, an evil, however, to which Catholics are 
not less exposed than the rest of mankind. 

When the intellect has once been properly trained and 
formed to have a connected view or grasp of things, it 
will display its powers with more or less effect according 



xviii Preface. 

to its particular quality and capacity in the individual. 
In the case of most men it makes itself felt in the good 
sense, sobriety of thought, reasonableness, candour, self- 
command, and steadiness ,of view, which characterize it. 
In some it will have developed habits of business, power 
of influencing others, and sagacity. In others it will 
elicit the talent of philosophical speculation, and lead 
the mind forward to eminence in this or that intellectual 
department. In all it will be a faculty of entering with 
comparative ease into any subject of thought, and of 
taking up with aptitude any science or profession. All 
this it will be and will do in a measure, even when the 
mental formation be made after a model but partially 
true ; for, as far as effectiveness goes, even false views of 
things have more influence and inspire more respect than 
no views at all. Men who fancy they see what is not 
are more energetic, and make their way better, than 
those who see nothing ; and so the undoubting infidel, 
the fanatic, the heresiarch, are able to do much, while the 
mere hereditary Christian, who has never realized the 
truths which he holds, is unable to do any thing. But, if 
consistency of view can add so much strength even to 
error, what may it not be expected to furnish to the 
dignity, the energy, and the influence of Truth ! 

Some one, however, will perhaps object that I am 
but advocating that spurious philosophism, which shows 
itself in what, for want of a word, I may call "viewi- 
ness," when I speak so much of the formation, and con 
sequent grasp, of the intellect. It may be said that the 
theory of University Education, which I have been 
delineating, if acted upon, would teach youths nothing 
soundly or thoroughly, and would dismiss them with 
nothing better than brilliant general views about all 
things whatever. 



Preface. xix 

This indeed, if well founded, would be a most serious 
objection to what I have advanced in this Volume, and 
would demand my immediate attention, had I any reason 
to think that I could not remove it at once, by a simple 
explanation of what I consider the true mode of educa 
ting, were this the place to do so. But these Discourses 
are directed simply to the consideration of the aims and 
principles of Education. Suffice it, then, to say here, that 
I hold very strongly that the first step in intellectual 
training is to impress upon a boy's mind the idea of 
science, method, order, principle, and system ; of rule 
and exception, of richness and harmony. This is com 
monly and excellently done by making him begin with 
Grammar ; nor can too great accuracy, or minuteness 
and subtlety of teaching be used towards him, as his 
faculties expand, with this simple purpose. Hence it is 
that critical scholarship is so important a discipline for 
him when he is leaving school for the University. A 
second science is the Mathematics : this should follow 
Grammar, still with the same object, viz., to give him a 
conception of development and arrangement from and 
around a common centre. Hence it is that Chronology 
and Geography are so necessary for him, when he reads 
History, which is otherwise little better than a story 
book. Hence, too, Metrical Composition, when he reads 
Poetry ; in order to stimulate his powers into action in 
every practicable way, and to prevent a merely passive 
reception of images and ideas which in that case are 
likely to pass out of the mind as soon as they have 
entered it. Let him once gain this habit of method, 
of starting from fixed points, of making his ground 
good as he goes, of distinguishing what he knows 
from what he does not know, and I conceive he will be 
gradually initiated into the largest and truest philoso- 



xx Preface. 

phical views, and will feel nothing but impatience and 
disgust at the random theories and imposing sophistries 
and dashing paradoxes, which carry away half-formed 
and superficial intellects. 

Such parti-coloured ingenuities are indeed one oi the 
chief evils of the day, and men of real talent are not slow 
to minister to them. An intellectual man, as the world 
now conceives of him, is one who is full of * views" on 
all subjects of philosophy, on all matters of the day. It 
is almost thought a disgrace not to have a view at a 
moment's notice on any question from the Personal 
Advent to the Cholera or Mesmerism. This is owing in 
great measure to the necessities of periodical literature, 
now so much in request. Every quarter of a year, every 
month, every day, there must be a supply, for the grati 
fication of the public, of new and luminous theories on 
the subjects of religion, foreign politics, home politics, 
civil economy, finance, trade, agriculture, emigration, 
and the colonies. Slavery, the gold fields, German 
philosophy, the French Empire, Wellington, Peel, Ire 
land, must all be practised on, day after day, by what 
are called original thinkers. As the great man's guest 
must produce his good stones or songs at the evening 
banquet, as the platform orator exhibits his telling facts 
at mid-day, so the journalist lies under the stern obliga 
tion of extemporizing his lucid views, leading ideas, and 
nutshell truths for the breakfast table. The very nature 
of periodical literature, broken into small wholes, and 
demanded punctually to an hour, involves the habit of 
this extempore philosophy. "Almost all the Ramblers/' 
says Boswell of Johnson. " were written just as they 
were wanted for the press ; he sent a certain portion of 
the copy of an essay, and wrote the remainder while the 
former part of it was printing." Few men have the gifts 



Prcjacc. xxi 

of Johnson, who to great vigour and resource of intellect, 
when it was fairly roused, united a rare common-sense 
and a conscientious regard for veracity, which preserved 
him from flippancy or extravagance in writing. Few 
men are Johnsons ; yet how many men at this day are 
assailed by incessant demands on their mental powers, 
which only a productiveness like his could suitably 
supply ! There is a demand for a reckless originality of 
thought, and a sparkling plausibility of argument, which 
he would have despised, even if he could have displayed ; 
a demand for crude theory and unsound philosophy, 
rather than none at all. It is a sort of repetition of the 
" Quid novi ? " of the Areopagus, and it must have an 
answer. Men must be found who can treat, where it is 
necessary, like the Athenian sophist, de omni scibili, 

" Grammaticus, Rhetor, Geometres, Pictor, Aliptes, 
Augur, Schoenobates, Medicus, Magus, omnia novit." 

I am speaking of such writers with a feeling of real 
sympathy for men who are under the rod of a cruel 
slavery. I have never indeed been in such circumstances 
myself, nor in the temptations which they involve ; but 
most men who have had to do with composition must 
know the distress which at times it occasions them to 
have to write a distress sometimes so keen and so 
specific that it resembles nothing else than bodily pain 
That pain is the token of the wear and tear of mind ; 
and, if works done comparatively at leisure involve such 
mental fatigue and exhaustion, what must be the toil of 
those whose intellects are to be flaunted daily before the 
public in full dress, and that dress ever new and varied, 
and spun, like the silkworm's, out of themselves ! Still, 
whatever true sympathy we may feel for the ministers 
of this dearly purchased luxury, and whatever sense we 



xxii Preface. 

may have of the great intellectual power which the 
literature in question displays, we cannot honestly close 
our eyes to its direct evil. 

One other remark suggests itself, which is the last I 
shall think it necessary to make. The authority, which 
in former times was lodged in Universities, now resides 
in very great measure in that literary world, as it is 
called, to which I have been referring. This is not satis 
factory, if, as no one can deny, its teaching be so off 
hand, so ambitious, so changeable. It increases the 
seriousness of the mischief, that so very large a portion 
of its writers are anonymous, for irresponsible power 
never can be any thing but a great evil ; and, moreover, 
that, even when they are known, they can give no better 
guarantee for the philosophical truth of their principles 
than their popularity at the moment, and their happy 
conformity in ethical character to the age which admires 
them. Protestants, however, may do as they will : it is 
a matter for their own consideration ; but at least it 
concerns us that our own literary tribunals and oracles 
of moral duty should bear a graver character. At least 
it is a matter of deep solicitude to Catholic Prelates that 
their people should be taught a wisdom, safe from the 
excesses and vagaries of individuals, embodied in institu 
tions which have stood the trial and received the sanc 
tion of ages, and administered by men who have no need 
to be anonymous, as being supported by their consis 
tency with their predecessors and with each other. 

November 21. 1852. 



,( 



UNIVERSITY TEACHING. 



DISCOURSE 

i. INTRODUCTORY 



ii. THEOLOGY A BRANCH OF KNOWLEDGE 19 

in. BEARING OF THEOLOGY ON OTHER KNOWLEDGE . . 43 

iv. BEARING OF OTHER KNOWLEDGE ON THEOLOGY . .71 

v. KNOWLEDGE ITS OWN END ....... gc 

vi. KNOWLEDGE VIEWED IN RELATION TO LEARNING . . 12.1 

vn. KNOWLEDGE VIEWED IN RELATION TO PROFESSIONAL SKILL 15 

VHI. KNOWLEDGE VIEWED IN RELATION TO RELIGIOUS DUTY . i-,g 

ix. DUTIES OF THE CHURCH TOWARDS KNOWLEDGE 21. 



I. 

UNIVERSITY TEACHING 

CONSIDERED IN NINE DISCOURSES. 



DISCOURSE I. 
INTRODUCTORY 

I. 

IN addressing myself, Gentlemen, to the consideration 
of a question which has excited so much interest, 
and elicited so much discussion at the present day, as 
that of University Education, I feel some explanation is 
due from me for supposing, after such high ability and 
wide experience have been brought to bear upon it, 
that any field remains for the additional labours either 
of a disputant or of an inquirer. If, nevertheless, I still 
venture to ask permission to continue the discussion, 
already so protracted, it is because the subject of Liberal 
Education, and of the principles on which it must be 
conducted, has ever had a hold upon my own mind ; and 
because I have lived the greater part of my life in a 
place which has all that time been occupied in a series 
of controversies both domestic and with strangers, and 
of measures, experimental or definitive, bearing upon it. 
About fifty years since, the English University, of which 
I was so long a member, after a century of inactivity, at 
length was roused, at a time when (as I may say) it was 
giving no education at all to the youth committed to its 
keeping, to a sense of the responsibilities which its pro 
fession and its station involved, and it presents to us 



2 Discourse L 

the singular example of an heterogeneous and an inde 
pendent body of men, setting about a work of self-refor 
mation, not from any pressure of public opinion, but 
because it was fitting and right to undertake it. Its 
initial efforts, begun and carried on amid many ob 
stacles, were met from without, as often happens in such 
cases, by ungenerous and jealous criticisms, which, at 
the very moment that they were urged, were beginning 
to be unjust. Controversy did but bring out more 
clearly to its own apprehension the views on which its 
reformation was proceeding, and throw them into a 
philosophical form. The course of beneficial change 
made progress, and what was at first but the result of 
individual energy and an act of the academical corpora 
tion, gradually became popular, and was taken up and 
carried out by the separate collegiate bodies, of which 
the University is composed. This was the first stage of 
the controversy. Years passed away, and then political 
adversaries arose against it, and the system of education 
which it had established was a second time assailed ; but 
still, since that contest was conducted for the most part 
through the medium, not of political acts, but of treatises 
and pamphlets, it happened as before that the threatened 
dangers, in the course of their repulse, did but afTord 
fuller development and more exact delineation to the 
principles of which the University was the representative 

In the former of these two controversies the charge 
brought against its studies was their remoteness from 
the occupations and duties of life, to which they are the 
formal introduction, or, in other words, their 'inutility; in 
the latter, it was their connexion with a particular form of 
belief, or, in other words, their religious exclusiveness, 

Living then so long as a witness, though hardly as an 
actor, in these scenes of intellectual conflict I am able 



Introductory. 3 

to bear witness to views of University Education, with 
out authority indeed in themselves, but not without 
value to a Catholic, and less familiar to him, as I con 
ceive, than they deserve to be. And, while an argument 
originating in the controversies to which I have referred, 
may be serviceable at this season to that great cause in 
which we are here so especially interested, to me per 
sonally it will afford satisfaction of a peculiar kind ; for. 
though it has been my lot for many years to take a 
prominent, sometimes a presumptuous, part in theological 
discussions, yet the natural turn of my mind carries me 
off to trains of thought like those which I am now about 
to open, which, important though they be for Catholic 
objects, and admitting of a Catholic treatment, are 
sheltered from the extreme delicacy and peril which 
attach to disputations directly bearing on the subject- 
matter of Divine Revelation, 

2. 

There are several reasons why I should open the 
discussion with a reference to the lessons with which 
past years have supplied me. One reason is this : It 
would concern me, Gentlemen, were I supposed to have 
got up my opinions for the occasion. This, indeed, would 
have been no reflection on me personally, supposing I 
were persuaded of their truth, when at length addressing 
myself to the inquiry ; but it would have destroyed, of 
course, the force of my testimony, and deprived such 
arguments, as I might adduce, of that moral persuasive 
ness which attends on tried and sustained conviction. 
It would have made me seem the advocate, rather than 
the cordial and deliberate maintainer and witness, of the 
doctrines which i was to support ; and, though it might 
be said to evidence the faith I reposed in the practical 



4 Discourse I. 

judgment of the Church, and the intimate concurrence 
of my own reason with the course she had authoritatively 
sanctioned, and the devotion with which I could promptly 
put myself at her disposal, it would have cast suspicion 
on the validity of reasonings and conclusions which 
rested on no independent inquiry, and appealed to no 
past experience. In that case it might have been plau 
sibly objected by opponents that I was the serviceable 
expedient of an emergency, and never, after all, could 
be more than ingenious and adroit in the management of 
an argument which was not my own, and which I was 
sure to forget again as readily as I had mastered it. 
But this is not so. The views to which I have referred 
have grown into my whole system of thought, and are, 
as it were, part of myself. Many changes has my mind 
gone through : here it has known no variation or vacilla 
tion of opinion, and though this by itself is no proof of 
the truth of my principles, it puts a seal upon conviction, 
and is a justification of earnestness and zeal Those prin 
ciples, which I am now to set forth under the sanction of 
the Catholic Church, were my profession at that early 
period of my life, when religion was to me more a matter 
of feeling and experience than of faith. They did but 
take greater hold upon me, as I was introduced to the 
records of Christian Antiquity, and approached in senti 
ment and desire to Catholicism ; and my sense of their 
correctness has been increased with the events of every 
year since I have been brought within its pale. 

And here I am brought to a second and more important 
reason for referring, on this occasion, to the conclusions 
at which Protestants have arrived on the subject of 
Liberal Education ; and it is as follows : Let it be ob 
served, then, that the principles on which I would conduct 
the inquiry are attainable, as I have already implied, by 



Introductory. 5 

the mefe experience of life. They do not come simply 
of theology ; they imply no supernatural discernment ; 
they have no special connexion with Revelation ; they 
almost arise out of the nature of the case ; they are 
dictated even by human prudence and wisdom, though a 
divine illumination be absent, and they are recognized 
by common sense, even where self-interest is not present 
to quicken it ; and, therefore, though true, and just, and 
good in themselves, they imply nothing whatever as to 
the religious profession of those who maintain them. 
They may be held by Protestants as well as by Catholics ; 
nay, there is reason to anticipate that in certain times 
and places they will be more thoroughly investigated, 
and better understood, and held more firmly by Protest 
ants than by ourselves. 

It is natural to expect this from the very circumstance 
that the philosophy of Education is founded on truths 
in the natural order. Where the sun shines bright, in 
the warm climate of the south, the natives of the place 
know little of safeguards against cold and wet. They 
have, indeed, bleak and piercing blasts ; they have chill 
and pouring rain, but only now and then, for a day or a 
week ; they bear the inconvenience as they best may, but 
they have not made it an art to repel it ; it is not worth 
their while; the science of calefaction and ventilation is 
reserved for the north. It is in this way that Catholics 
stand relatively to Protestants in the science of Edu 
cation ; Protestants depending on human means mainly, 
are led to make the most of them : their sole resource is 
to use what they have ; " Knowledge is " their " power* 
and nothing else ; they are the anxious cultivators of a 
rugged soil. It is otherwise with us ; "funes ceciderunt 
tniJii in prceclaris" We have a goodly inheritance. This 
is apt to cause us (I do not mean to rely too much on 



6 Discourse L 

prayer, and the Divine Blessin s for that is impossible ; but) 
we sometimes forget that we shall please Him best, and get 
most from Him, when, according to the Fable, we " put 
our shoulder to the wheel,!' when we use what we have by 
nature to the utmost, at the same time that we look out 
for what is beyond nature in the confidence of faith and 
hope. However, we are sometimes tempted to let things 
take their course, as if they would in one way or another 
turn up right at last for certain ; and so we go on, living 
from hand to mouth, getting into difficulties and getting 
out of them, succeeding certainly on the whole, but with 
failure in detail which might be avoided, and with much 
of imperfection or inferiority in our appointments and 
plans, and much disappointment, discouragement, and 
collision of opinion in consequence. If this be in any 
measure the state of the case, there is certainly so far 
a reason for availing ourselves of the* investigations 
and experience of those who are not Catholics, when we 
have to address ourselves to the subject of Liberal 
Education. 

Nor is there surely any thing derogatory to the position 
of a Catholic in such a proceeding. The Church has 
ever appealed and deferred to witnesses and authorities 
external to herself, in those matters in which she 
thought they had means of forming a judgment: and 
that on the principle, Cuique in arte sua credendnm. 
She has even used unbelievers and pagans in evidence 
of her truth, as far as their testimony went. She avails 
herself of scholars, critics, and antiquarians, who are not 
of her communion. She has worded her theological teach 
ing in the phraseology of Aristotle ; Aquila, Symmachus, 
Theodotion, Origen, Eusebius, and Apollinaris, all more 
or less heterodox, have supplied materials for primitive 
exegetics. St. Cyprian called Tertullian his master; 



Introductory. 7 

St. Augustin refers to Ticonius ; Bossuet, in modern 
times, complimented the labours of the Anglican Bull; 
the Benedictine editors of the Fathers are familiar with 
the labours of Fell, Ussher, Pearson, and Beveridge. 
Pope Benedict XIV. cites according to the occasion the 
works of Protestants without reserve, and the late French 
collection of Christian Apologists contains the writings 
of Locke, Burnet, Tillotson, and Paley. If, then, I 
come forward in any degree as borrowing the views of 
certain Protestant schools on the point which is to be 
discussed, I do so, Gentlemen, as believing, first, that the 
Catholic Church has ever, in the plenitude of her divine 
illumination, made use of whatever truth or wisdom she 
has found in their teaching or their measures ; and next, 
that in particular places or times her children are likely 
to profit from external suggestions or lessons, which have 
not been provided for them by herself. 

3- 

And here I may mention a third reason for appealing 
at the outset to the proceedings of Protestant bodies in 
regard to Liberal Education. It will serve to intimate 
the mode in which I propose to handle my subject 
altogether. Observe then, Gentlemen, I have no inten 
tion, in any thing I shall say, of bringing into the argument 
the authority of the Church, or any authority at all ; but 
I shall consider the question simply on the grounds of 
human reason and human wisdom. I am investigating 
in the abstract, and am determining what is in itself right 
and true. For the moment I know nothing, so to say, 
of history. I take things as I find them ; I have no con 
cern with the past ; I find myself here ; I set myself to 
che duties I find here ; I set myself to further, by every 
means in my power, doctrines and views, true in them- 



8 Discourse L 

selves, recognized by Catholics as such, familiar to my 
own mind ; and to do this quite apart from the consider 
ation of questions which have been determined without 
me and before me. I ajn here the advocate and the 
minister of a certain great principle ; yet not merely 
advocate and minister, else had I not been here at all. It 
has been my previous keen sense and hearty reception 
of that principle, that has been at once the reason, as I 
must suppose, of my being selected for this office, 
and is the cause of my accepting it. I am told on 
authority that a principle is expedient, which I have 
ever felt to be true. And I argue in its behalf on its 
own merits, the authority, which brings me here, being 
my opportunity for arguing, but not the ground of my 
argument itself. 

And a fourth reason is here suggested for consulting 
the history of Protestant institutions, when I am going 
to speak of the object and nature of University Education. 
It will serve to remind you, Gentlemen, that I am con 
cerned with questions, not simply of immutable truth, 
but of practice and expedience. It would ill have 
become me to undertake a subject, on which points of 
dispute have arisen among persons so far above me in 
authority and name, in relation to a state of society, 
about which I have so much to learn, if it involved an 
appeal to sacred truths, or the determination of some 
imperative rule of conduct. It would have been pre 
sumptuous in me so to have acted, nor am I so acting. 
Even the question of the union of Theology with the 
secular Sciences, which is its religious side, simple as it 
is of solution in the abstract, has, according to difference 
of circumstances, been at different times differently 
decided. Necessity has no law, and expedience is often 
one form of necessity. It is no principle with sensible 



Introductory. 9 

men, of whatever cast of opinion, to do always what is 
abstractedly best. Where no direct duty forbids, we 
may be obliged to do, as being best under circumstances, 
what we murmur and rise against, while we do it. We 
see that to attempt more is to effect less ; that we must 
accept so much, or gain nothing ; and so perforce we 
reconcile ourselves to what we would have far otherwise, 
if we could. Thus a system of what is called secular 
Education, in which Theology and the Sciences are 
taught separately, may, in a particular place or time, be 
the least of evils ; it may be of long standing ; it may be 
dangerous to meddle with ; it may be professedly a 
temporary arrangement ; it may be under a process of 
improvement ; its disadvantages may be neutralized by 
the persons by whom, or the provisions under which, it is 
administered. 

Hence it was, that in the early ages the Church al 
lowed her children to attend the heathen schools for the 
acquisition of secular accomplishments, where, as no 
one can doubt, evils existed, at least as great as can 
attend on Mixed Education now. The gravest Fathers 
recommended for Christian youth the use of Pagan 
masters ; the most saintly Bishops and most authorita 
tive Doctors had been sent in their adolescence by 
Christian parents to Pagan lecture halls.* And, not to 
take other instances, at this very time, and in this very 
country, as regards at least the poorer classes of the 
community, whose secular acquirements ever must be 
limited, it has seemed best to the Irish Bishops, under 
the circumstances, to suffer the introduction into the 
country of a system of Mixed Education in the schools 
called National. Such a state of things, however, is 
passing away ; as regards University education at least, 

* Vide M. L'Abbe Lalanne's recent work. 



10 Discourse L 

the highest authority has now decided that the plan, 
which is abstractedly best, is in this time and country 
also most expedient. 

4- 

And here I have an opportunity of recognizing once 
for all that higher view of approaching the subject of 
these Discourses, which, after this formal recognition, I 
mean to dispense with. Ecclesiastical authority, not 
argument, is the supreme rule and the appropriate guide 
for Catholics in matters of religion. It has always the 
right to interpose, and sometimes, in the conflict of 
parties and opinions, it is called on to exercise that 
right. It has lately exercised it in our own instance : it 
has interposed in favour of a pure University system for 
Catholic youth, forbidding compromise or accommodation 
of any kind. Of course its decision must be heartily 
accepted and obeyed, and that the more, because the 
decision proceeds, not simply from the Bishops of Ire 
land, great as their authority is, but the highest authority 
on earth, from the Chair of St. Peter. 

Moreover, such a decision not only demands our 
submission, but has a claim upon our trust. It not only 
acts as a prohibition of any measures, but as an ipso 
facto confutation of any reasonings, inconsistent with it. 
It carries with it an earnest and an augury of its own 
expediency. For instance, I can fancy, Gentlemen, 
there may be some, among those who hear me, disposed 
to say that they are ready to acquit the principles of 
Education, which I am to advocate, of all fault what 
ever, except that of being impracticable. I can fancy 
them granting to me, that those principles are most 
correct and most obvious, simply irresistible on paper, but 
maintaining, nevertheless, that after all, they are nothing 



Introductory. i i 

more than the dreams of men who live out of the world, 
and who do not see the difficulty of keeping Catholicism 
anyhow afloat on the bosom of this wonderful nine 
teenth century. Proved, indeed, those principles are, to 
demonstration, but they will not work. Nay, it was 
my own admission just now, that, in a particular in 
stance, it might easily happen, that what is only second 
best is best practically, because what is actually best is 
out of the question. 

This, I hear you say to yourselves, is the state of 
things at present. You recount in detail the numberless 
impediments, great and small, formidable or only vexa 
tious, which at every step embarrass the attempt to carry 
out ever so poorly a principle in itself so true and 
ecclesiastical. You appeal in your defence to wise and 
sagacious intellects, who are far from enemies to Catho 
licism, or to the Irish Hierarchy, and you have no hope, 
or rather you absolutely disbelieve, that Education can 
possibly be conducted, here and now, on a theological 
principle, or that youths of different religions can, under 
the circumstances of the country, be educated apart from 
each other. The more you think over the state of 
politics, the position of parties, the feelings of classes, 
and the experience of the past, the more chimerical 
does it seem to you to aim at a University, of \\hich 
Catholicity is the fundamental principle. Nay, even if 
the attempt could accidentally succeed, would not the 
mischief exceed the benefit of it ? How great the 
sacrifices, in how many ways, by which it would be 
preceded and followed ! how many wounds, open and 
secret, would it inflict upon the body politic ! And, if 
it fails, which is to be expected, then a double mischief 
will ensue from its recognition of evils which it has been 
unable to remedy. These are your deep misgivings ; 



i 2 Discourse L 

and, in proportion to the force with which they come to 
you, is the concern and anxiety which you feel, that 
there should be those whom you love, whom you 
revere, who from one cawse or other refuse to enter 
into them. 

5- 

This, I repeat, is what some good Catholics will say 
to me, and more than this. They will express them 
selves better than I can speak for them in their behalf, 
with more earnestness and point, with more force of 
argument and fulness of detail ; and I will frankly and 
at once acknowledge, that I shall insist on the high theo 
logical view of a University without attempting to give 
a direct answer to their arguments against its present 
practicability. I do not say an answer cannot be given ; 
on the contrary, I have a confident expectation that, in 
proportion as those objections are looked in the face, 
they will fade away. But, however this may be, it would 
not become me to argue the matter with those who 
understand the circumstances of the problem so much 
better than myself. What do I know of the state of things 
in Ireland, that I should presume to put ideas of mine, 
which could not be right except by accident, by the side 
of theirs, who speak in the country of their birth and 
their home? No, Gentlemen, you are natural judges of 
the difficulties which beset us, and they are doubtless 
greater than I can even fancy or forbode. Let me, for 
the sake of argument, admit all you say against our 
enterprise, and a great deal more, Your proof of its 
intrinsic impossibility shall be to me as cogent as my 
own of its theological advisableness. Why, then, should 
I be so rash and perverse as to involve myself in trouble 
not properly mine ? Why go out of my own place ? 



Introductory. 1 3 

Why so headstrong and reckless as to lay up for myself 
miscarriage and disappointment, as though I were not 
sure to have enough of personal trial anyhow without 
going about to seek for it ? 

Reflections such as these would be decisive even 
with the boldest and most capable minds, but for one 
consideration. In the midst of our difficulties I have 
one ground of hope, just one stay, but, as I think, a 
sufficient one, which serves me in the stead of all other 
argument whatever, which hardens me against criticism, 
which supports me if I begin to despond, and to 
which I ever come round, when the question of the 
possible and the expedient is brought into discussion. 
It is the decision of the Holy See ; St. Peter has spoken, 
it is he who has enjoined that which seems to us so 
unpromising. He has spoken, and has a claim on us to 
trust him. He is no recluse, no solitary student, no 
dreamer about the past, no doter upon the dead and 
gone, no projector of the visionary. He for eighteen 
hundred years has lived in the world ; he has seen all 
fortunes, he has encountered all adversaries, he has 
shaped himself for all emergencies. If ever there was 
a power on earth who had an eye for the times, who 
has confined himself to the practicable, and has been 
happy in his anticipations, whose words have been facts, 
and whose commands prophecies, such is he in the 
history of ages, who sits from generation to generation 
in the Chair of the Apostles, as the Vicar of Christ, and 
the Doctor of His Church. 

6. 

These are not the words of rhetoric, Gentlemen, but of 
history. All who take part with the Apostle, are on the 
winning side. He has long since given warrants for the 



14 Discourse 1 

confidence which he claims. From the first he has 
looked through the wide world, of which he has the 
burden ; and, according to the need of the day, and the 
inspirations of his Lord, he has set himself now to one 
tiling, now to another ; but to all in season, and to no 
thing in vain. He came first upon an age of refinement 
and luxury like our own, and, in spite of the persecutor, 
fertile in the resources of his cruelty, he soon gathered, 
out of all classes of society, the slave, the soldier, the 
high-born lady, and the sophist, materials enough to 
form a people to his Master's honour. The savage hordes 
come down in torrents from the north, and Peter went 
out to meet them, and by his very eye he sobered them, 
and backed them in their full career. They turned aside 
and flooded tLj whole earth, but only to be more surely 
civilized by him, and to be made ten times more his 
children even than the older populations which they had 
overwhelmed. Lawless kings arose, sagacious as the 
Roman, passionate as the Hun, yet in him they found 
their match, and were shattered, and he lived on. The 
gates of the earth were opened to the east and west, and 
men poured out to take possession ; but he "went with 
them by his missionaries, to China, to Mexico, carried 
along by zeal and charity, as far as those children of 
men were led by enterprise, covetousness, or ambition. 
Has he failed in his successes up to this hour ? Did he, 
in our fathers' day, fail in his struggle with Joseph of 
Germany and his confederates, with Napoleon, a greater 
name, and his dependent kings, that, though in another 
kind of fight, he should fail in ours ? What grey hairs 
are on the head of Judah, whose youth is renewed like 
the eagle's, whose feet are like the feet of harts, and 
underneath the Everlasting arms ? 

Jn the first centuries of the Church all this practical 



Introductory. 1 5 

sagacity of Holy Church was mere matter of faith, but 
every age, as it has come, has confirmed faith by actual 
sight ; and shame on us, if, with the accumulated testi 
mony of eighteen centuries, our eyes are too gross to 
see those victories which the Saints have ever seen by 
anticipation. Least of all can we, the Catholics of islands 
which have in the cultivation and diffusion of Knowledge 
heretofore been so singularly united under the auspices 
of the Apostolic See, least of all can we be the men to 
distrust its wisdom and to predict its failure, when it 
sends us on a similar mission now. I cannot forget that, 
at a time when Celt and Saxon were alike savage, it was 
the See of Peter that gave both of them, first faith, 
then civilization ; and then again bound them together 
in one by the seal of a joint commission to convert and 
illuminate in their turn the pagan continent. I cannot 
forget how it was from Rome that the glorious St. Patrick 
ivas sent to Ireland, and did a work so great that he 
could not have a successor in it, the sanctity and learning 
and zeal and charity which followed on his death being 
but the result of the one impulse which he gave. I 
cannot forget how, in no long time, under the fostering 
breath of the Vicar of Christ, a country of heathen super 
stitions became the very wonder and asylum of all people, 
the wonder by reason of its knowledge, sacred and 
profane, and the asylum of religion, literature and 
science, when chased away from the continent by the 
barbarian invaders. I recollect its hospitality, freely 
accorded to the pilgrim ; its volumes munificently pre 
sented to the foreign student ; and the prayers, the 
blessings, the holy rites, the solemn chants, which sancti 
fied the while both giver and receiver. 

Nor can I fprget either, how my own England had 
meanwhile become the solicitude of the same unwearied 



1 6 Discourse L 

eye : how Augustine was sent to us by Gregory ; how he 
fainted in the way at the tidings of our fierceness, and, 
but for the Pope, would have shrunk as from an 
impossible expedition ; how he was forced on " in 
weakness and in fear and in much trembling," until he 
had achieved the conquest of the island to Christ. Nor, 
again, how it came to pass that, when Augustine died 
and his work slackened, another Pope, unwearied still, 
sent three saints from Rome, to ennoble and refine the 
people Augustine had converted. Three holy men set 
out for England together, of different nations : Theodore, 
an Asiatic Greek, from Tarsus ; Adrian, an African ; 
Bennett alone a Saxon, for Peter knows no distinction of 
races in his ecumenical work. They came with theology 
and science in their train ; with relics, with pictures, with 
manuscripts of the Holy Fathers and the Greek classics ; 
and Theodore and Adrian founded schools, secular and 
monastic, all over England, while Bennett brought to the 
north the large library he had collected in foreign parts, 
and, with plans and ornamental work from France, 
erected a church of stone, under the invocation of St. 
Peter, after the Roman fashion, " which," says the his 
torian,* "he most affected." I call to mind how St. 
Wilfrid, St. John of Beverley, St. Bede, and other saintly 
men, carried on the good work in the following genera 
tions and how from that time forth the two islands, 
England and Ireland, in a dark and dreary age, were 
the two lights of Christendom, and had no claims on each 
other, and no thought of self, save in the interchange of 
kind offices and the rivalry of love. 

7- 
O memorable time, when St. Aidan and the Irish 

* Cressy. 



Introductory. 1 7 

monks went up to Lindisfarne and Melrose, and taught 
the Saxon youth, and when a St. Cuthbert and a St. 
Eata repaid their charitable toil ! O blessed days 
of peace and confidence, when the Celtic Mailduf pene 
trated to Malmesbury in the south, which has inherited 
his name, and founded there the famous school which 
gave birth to the great St. Aldhelm ! O precious seal 
and testimony of Gospel unity, when, as Aldhelm in 
turn tells us, the English went to Ireland " numerous as 
bees ; " when the Saxon St. Egbert and St. Willibrod, 
preachers to the heathen Prisons, made the voyage to 
Ireland to prepare themselves for their work ; and when 
from Ireland went forth to Germany the two noble 
Ewalds, Saxons also, to earn the crown of martyrdom ! 
Such a period, indeed, so rich in grace, in peace, in love, 
and in good works, could only last for a season ; but, 
even when the light was to pass away from them, the 
sister islands were destined, not to forfeit, but to transmit 
it together. The time came when the neighbouring 
continental country was in turn to hold the mission 
which they had exercised so long and well ; and when 
to it they made over their honourable office, faithful to 
the alliance of two hundred years, they made it a joint 
act. Alcuin was the pupil both of the English and of 
the Irish schools ; and when Charlemagne would revive 
science and letters in his own France, it was Alcuin, the 
representative both of the Saxon and the Celt, who was 
the chief of those who went forth to supply the need of 
the great Emperor. Such was the foundation of the 
School of Paris, from which, in the course of centuries, 
sprang the famous University, the glory of the middle 
ages. 

The past never returns ; the course of events, old in 

2 



1 8 Discourse I. 

its texture, is ever new in its colouring and fashion. 
England and Ireland are not what they once were, but 
Rome is where it was, and St. Peter is the same : his 
zeal, his charity, his mission, his gifts are all the same. 
He of old made the two islands one by giving them 
joint work of teaching ; and now surely he is giving us 
a like mission, and we shall become one again, while we 
zealously and lovingly fulfil it. 



DISCOURSE II. 
THEOLOGY A BRANCH OF KNOWLEDGE. 

THERE were two questions, to which I drew your 
attention, Gentlemen, in the beginning of my first 
Discourse, as being of especial importance and interest 
at this time: first, whether it is consistent with the idea 
of University teaching to exclude Theology from a place 
among the sciences which it embraces ; next, whether it 
is consistent with that idea to make the useful arts and 
sciences its direct and principal concern, to the neglect 
of those liberal studies and exercises of mind, in which 
it has heretofore been considered mainly to consist. 
These are the questions which will form the subject of 
what I have to lay before you, and I shall now enter upon 
the former of the two. 

I. 

It is the fashion just now, as you very well know, to 
erect so-called Universities, without making any provi 
sion in them at all for Theological chairs. Institutions 
of this kind exist both here and in England. Such a 
procedure, though defended by writers of the genera 
tion just passed with much plausible argument and not 
a little wit, seems to me an intellectual absurdity ; and 
my reason for saying so runs, with whatever abruptness, 
into the form of a syllogism : A University, I should 



2o Discourse II. 

lay down, by its very name professes to teach universal 
knowledge: Theology is surely a branch of knowledge : 
how then is it possible for it to profess all branches of 
knowledge, and yet to exclude from the subjects of its 
teaching one which, to say the least, is as important 
and as large as any of them ? I do not see that either 
premiss of this argument is open to exception. 

As to the range of University teaching, certainly the 
very name of University is inconsistent with restrictions 
of any kind. Whatever was the original reason of the 
adoption of that term, which is unknown,* I am only 
putting on it its popular, its recognized sense, when I say 
that a University should teach universal knowledge. 
That there is a real necessity for this universal teaching 
in the highest schools of intellect, I will show by-and-by ; 
here it is sufficient to say that such universality is con 
sidered by writers on the subject to be the very charac 
teristic of a University, as contrasted with other seats of 
learning. Thus Johnson, in his Dictionary, defines it to 
be "a school where all arts and faculties are taught ;" 
and Mosheim, writing as an historian, says that, before 
the rise of the University of Paris, for instance, at Padua, 
or Salamanca, or Cologne, " the whole circle of sciences 
then known was not taught ; " but that the school of 
Paris, "which exceeded all others in various respects, 
as well as in the number of teachers and students, was 
the first to embrace all the arts and sciences, and there 
fore first became a University." f 

If, with other authors, we consider the word to be 
derived from the invitation which is held out by a Uni 
versity to students of every kind, the result is the same ; 
for, if certain branches of knowledge were excluded, 

* In Roman law it means a Corporation. Vid. Keuffel, de Scholis. 
t Hist. vol. ii. p. 529. London, 1841. 



Theology a Branch of Knowledge. 21 

those students of course would be excluded also, who 
desired to pursue them. 

Is it, then, logically consistent in a seat of learning 
to call itself a University, and to exclude Theology 
from the number of its studies ? And again, is it won 
derful that Catholics, even in the view of reason, putting 
aside faith or religious duty, should be dissatisfied with 
existing institutions, which profess to be Universities, 
and refuse to teach Theology ; and that they should in 
consequence desire to possess seats of learning, which 
are, not only more Christian, but more philosophical 
in their construction, and larger and deeper in their 
provisions ? 

But this, of course, is to assume that Theology is a 
science, and an important one : so I will throw my argu 
ment into a more exact form. I say, then, that if a 
University be, from the nature of the case, a place of 
instruction, where universal knowledge is professed, and 
if in a certain University, so called, the subject of Reli 
gion is excluded, one of two conclusions is inevitable, 
either, on the one hand, that the province of Religion is 
very barren of real knowledge, or, on the other hand, that 
in such University one special and important branch of 
knowledge is omitted. I say, the advocate of such an 
institution must say this, or he must say that; he must own, 
either that little or nothing is known about the Supreme 
Being, or that his seat of learning calls itself what it is not. 
This is the thesis which I lay down, and on which I shall 
insist as the subject of this Discourse. I repeat, such a 
compromise between religious parties, as is involved in 
the establishment of a University which makes no reli 
gious profession, implies that those parties severally 
consider, not indeed that their own respective opinions 
are trifles in a moral and practical point of view of 



22 Discourse II. 

course not ; but certainly as much as this, that they 
are not knowledge. Did they in their hearts believe 
that their private views of religion, whatever they are, 
were absolutely and objectively true, it is inconceivable 
that they would so insult them as to consent to their 
omission in an Institution which is bound, from the 
nature of the case from its very idea and its name 
to make a profession of all sorts of knowledge whatever. 

2. 

I think this will be found to be no matter of words. 
I allow then fully, that, when men combine together 
for any common object, they are obliged, as a matter of 
course, in order to secure the advantages accruing from 
united action, to sacrifice many of their private opinions 
and wishes, and to drop the minor differences, as they 
are commonly called, which exist between man and man. 
No two persons perhaps are to be found, however inti 
mate, however congenial in tastes and judgments, how 
ever eager to have one heart and one soul, but must 
deny themselves, for the sake of each other, much which 
they like or desire, if they are to live together happily. 
Compromise, in a large sense of the word, is the first 
principle of combination ; and any one who insists on 
enjoying his rights to the full, and his opinions without 
toleration for his neighbour's, and his own way in all 
things, will soon have all things altogether to himself 
and no one to share them with him. But most true as 
this confessedly is, still there is an obvious limit, on the 
other hand, to these compromises, however necessary they 
be ; and this is found in the proviso, that the differences 
surrendered should be but " minor," or that there should 
be no sacrifice of the main object of the combination, in 
the concessions which are mutually made. Any sacrifice 



Theology a Branch of Knowledge. 23 

which compromises that object is destructive of the 
principle of the combination, and no one who would be 
consistent can be a party to it. 

Thus, for instance, if men of various religious denomi 
nations join together for the dissemination of what are 
called " evangelical " tracts, it is under the belief, that, 
the object of their uniting, as recognized on all hands, 
being the spiritual benefit of their neighbours, no reli 
gious exhortations, whatever be their character, can 
essentially interfere with that benefit, which faithfully 
insist upon the Lutheran doctrine of Justification. If, 
again, they agree together in printing and circulating the 
Protestant Bible, it is because they, one and all, hold to 
the principle, that, however serious be their differences 
of religious sentiment, such differences fade away before 
the one great principle, which that circulation symbolizes 
that the Bible, the whole Bible, and nothing but the 
Bible, is the religion of Protestants. On the contrary, 
if the committee of some such association inserted tracts 
into the copies of the said Bible which they sold, and 
tracts in recommendation of the Athanasian Creed or 
the merit of good works, I conceive any subscribing 
member would have a just right to complain of a pro 
ceeding, which compromised the principle of Private 
Judgment as the one true interpreter of Scripture. 
These instances are sufficient to illustrate my general 
position, that coalitions and comprehensions for an 
object, have their life in the prosecution of that object, 
and cease to have any meaning as soon as that object is 
compromised or disparaged. 

When, then, a number of persons come forward, not 
as politicians, not as diplomatists, lawyers, traders, or 
speculators, but with the one object of advancing Uni 
versal Knowledge, much we may allow them to sacrifice. 



24 Discourse II. 

ambition, reputation, leisure, comfort, party-interests, 
gold ; one thing they may not sacrifice, Knowledge 
itself. Knowledge being their object, they need not of 
course insist on their own private views about ancient or 
modern history, or national prosperity, or the balance of 
power; they need not of course shrink from the co-ope 
ration of those who hold the opposite views ; but stipulate 
they must that Knowledge itself is not compromised ; 
and as to those views, of whatever kind, which they do 
allow to be dropped, it is plain they consider such to be 
opinions, and nothing more, however dear, however im 
portant to themselves personally ; opinions ingenious, 
admirable, pleasurable, beneficial, expedient, but not 
worthy the name of Knowledge or Science Thus no 
one would insist on the Malthusian teaching being a sine 
qud non in a seat of learning, who did not think it simply 
ignorance not to be a Malthusian ; and no one would 
consent to drop the Newtonian theory, who thought it 
to have been proved true, in the same sense as the ex 
istence of the sun and moon is true. If, then, in an 
Institution which professes all knowledge, nothing is 
professed, nothing is taught about the Supreme Being, 
it is fair to infer that every individual in the number of 
those who advocate that Institution, supposing him con 
sistent, distinctly holds that nothing is known for certain 
about the Supreme Being ; nothing such, as to have any 
claim to be regarded as a material addition to the stock 
of general knowledge existing in the world. If on the 
other hand it turns out that something considerable is 
known about the Supreme Being, whether from Reason 
or Revelation, then the Institution in question professes 
every science, and yet leaves out the foremost of them. 
In a word, strong as may appear the assertion, I do not 
see how I can avoid making it, and bear with me, Gentle- 



Theology a Branch oj Knowledge. 25 

men, while I do so, viz., such an Institution cannot be 
what it professes, if there be a God. I do not wish to 
declaim ; but, by the very force of the terms, it is very 
plain, that a Divine Being and a University so circum 
stanced cannot co-exist. 

3- 

Still, however, this may seem to many an abrupt con 
clusion, and will not be acquiesced in : what answer, 
Gentlemen, will be made to it ? Perhaps this : It will 
be said, that there are different kinds or spheres of 
Knowledge, human, divine, sensible, intellectual, and the 
like ; and that a University certainly takes in all varie 
ties of Knowledge in its own line, but still that it has 
a line of its own. It contemplates, it occupies a certain 
order, a certain platform, of Knowledge. I understand 
the remark ; but I own to you, I do not understand how 
it can be made to apply to the matter in hand. I can 
not so construct my definition of the subject-matter of 
University Knowledge, and so draw my boundary lines 
around it, as to include therein the other sciences com 
monly studied at Universities, and to exclude the 
science of Religion. For instance, are we to limit our 
idea of University Knowledge by the evidence of our 
senses ? then we exclude ethics ; by intuition ? we ex 
clude history ; by testimony ? we exclude metaphysics ; 
by abstract reasoning ? we exclude physics. Is not the 
being of a God reported to us by testimony, handed 
down by history, inferred by an inductive process, brought 
home to us by metaphysical necessity, urged on us by 
the suggestions of our conscience ? It is a truth in the 
natural order, as well as in the supernatural. So much 
for its origin ; and, when obtained, what is it worth ? Is 
it a great truth or a small one ? Is it a comprehensive 



26 Discourse IL 

truth ? Say that no other religious idea whatever were 
given but it, and you have enough to fill the mind ; you 
have at once a whole dogmatic system. The word 
" God " is a Theology in itself, indivisibly one, inex 
haustibly various, from the vastness and the simplicity 
of its meaning. Admit a God, and you introduce 
among the subjects of your knowledge, a fact encom 
passing, closing in upon, absorbing, every other fact 
conceivable. How can we investigate any part of any 
order of Knowledge, and stop short of that which enters 
into every order ? All true principles run over with it, 
all phenomena converge to it ; it is truly the First and 
the Last. In word indeed, and in idea, it is easy enough 
to divide Knowledge into human and divine, secular and 
religious, and to lay down that we will address ourselves 
to the one without interfering with the other ; but it is 
impossible in fact. Granting that divine truth differs in 
kind from human, so do human truths differ in kind one 
from another. If the knowledge of the Creator is in a 
different order from knowledge of the creature, so, in like 
manner, metaphysical science is in a different order from 
physical, physics from history, history from ethics. 
You will soon break up into fragments the whole circle 
of secular knowledge, if you begin the mutilation with 
divine. 

I have been speaking simply of Natural Theology ; 
my argument of course is stronger when I go on to 
Revelation. Let the doctrine of the Incarnation be 
true : is it not at once of the nature of an historical fact, 
and of a metaphysical? Let it be true that there are 
Angels : how is not this a point of knowledge in the 
same sense as the naturalist's asseveration, that myriads 
of living things might co-exist on the point of a needle ? 
That the Earth is to be burned by fire, is, if true, as 



Theology a Branch of Knowledge. 27 

large a fact as that huge monsters once played amid its 
depths ; that Antichrist is to come, is as categorical a 
heading to a chapter of history, as that Nero or Julian 
was Emperor of Rome ; that a divine influence moves 
the will, is a subject of thought not more mysterious 
than the result of volition on our muscles, which we 
admit as a fact in metaphysics. 

I do not see how it is possible for a philosophical mind, 
first, to believe these religious facts to be true ; next, to 
consent to ignore them ; and thirdly, in spite of this, to go 
on to profess to be teaching all the while de omni scibili. 
No ; if a man thinks in his heart that these religious facts 
are short of truth, that they are not true in the sense in 
which the general fact and the law of the fall of a stone to 
the earth is true, I understand his excluding Religion from 
his University, though he professes other reasons for its 
exclusion. In that case the varieties of religious opinion 
under which he shelters his conduct, are not only his 
apology for publicly disowning Religion, but a cause of 
his privately disbelieving it. He does not think that any 
thing is known or can be known for certain, about the 
origin of the world or the end of man. 

4- 

This, I fear, is the conclusion to which intellects, clear, 
logical, and consistent, have come, or are coming, from 
the nature of the case ; and, alas ! in addition to this 
primd-facie suspicion, there are actual tendencies in the 
same direction in Protestantism, viewed whether in its 
original idea, or again in the so-called Evangelical move 
ment in these islands during the last century. The reli 
gious world, as it is styled, holds, generally speaking, that 
Religion consists, not in knowledge, but in feeling or senti 
ment. The old Catholic notion, which still lingers in the 



28 Discourse. II. 

Established Church, was, that Faith was an intellectual 
act, its object truth, and its result knowledge. Thus it 
you look into the Anglican Prayer Book, you will find 
definite credenda, as wejl as definite agenda ; but in pro 
portion as the Lutheran leaven spread, it became fashion 
able to say that Faith was, not an acceptance of revealed 
doctrine, not an act of the intellect, but a feeling, an 
emotion, an affection, an appetency; and, as this view 
of Faith obtained, so was the connexion of Faith with 
Truth and Knowledge more and more either forgotten 
or denied. At length the identity of this (so-called) 
spirituality of heart and the virtue of Faith was acknow 
ledged on all hands. Some men indeed disapproved 
the pietism in question, others admired it ; but whether 
they admired or disapproved, both the one party and 
the other found themselves in agreement on the main 
point, viz. in considering that this really was in sub 
stance Religion, and nothing else ; that Religion was 
based, not on argument, but on taste and sentiment, that 
nothing was objective, every thing subjective, in doctrine. 
I say, even those who saw through the affectation in 
which the religious school of which I am speaking clad 
itself, still came to think that Religion, as such, consisted 
in something short of intellectual exercises, viz., in the 
affections, in the imagination, in inward persuasions and 
consolations, in pleasurable sensations, sudden changes, 
and sublime fancies. They learned to believe and to 
take it for granted, that Religion was nothing beyond a 
supply of the wants of human nature, not an external 
fact and a Avork of God. There was, it appeared, a 
demand for Religion, and therefore there was a supply ; 
human nature could not do without Religion, any more 
than it could do without bread ; a supply was absolutely 
necessary, good or bad, and, as in the case of the articles 



Theology a Branch, of Knowledge. 29 

of daily sustenance, an article which was really inferior 
was better than none at all. Thus Religion was useful, 
venerable, beautiful, the sanction of order, the stay of 
government, the curb of self-will and self-indulgence, 
which the laws cannot reach : but, after all, on what was 
it based ? Why, that was a question delicate to ask, 
and imprudent to answer ; but, if the truth must be 
spoken, however reluctantly, the long and the short of 
the matter was this, that Religion was based on custom, 
on prejudice, on law, on education, on habit, on loyalty, 
on feudalism, on enlightened expedience, on many, 
many things, but not at all on reason ; reason was nei 
ther its warrant, nor its instrument, and science had as 
little connexion with it as with the fashions of the season, 
or the state of the weather. 

You see, Gentlemen, how a theory or philosophy, 
which began with the religious changes of the sixteenth 
century, has led to conclusions, which the authors of 
those changes would be the first to denounce, and has 
been taken up by that large and influential body which 
goes by the name of Liberal or Latitudinarian ; and how, 
where it prevails, it is as unreasonable of course to de 
mand for Religion a chair in a University, as to demand 
one for fine feeling, sense of honour, patriotism, grati 
tude, maternal affection, or good companionship, pro 
posals which would be simply unmeaning. 

5- 

Now, in illustration of what I have been saying, I will 
appeal, in the first place, to a statesman, but not merely 
so, to no mere politician, no trader in places, or in votes, 
or in the stock market, but to a philosopher, to an orator, 
to one whose profession, whose aim, has ever been to 
cultivate the fair, the noble, and the generous. I cannot 



30 Discourse 11. 

forget the celebrated discourse of the celebrated man to 
whom I am referring- ; a man who is first in his peculiar 
walk; and who, moreover (which is much to my purpose), 
has had a share, as much as any one alive, in effecting 
the public recognition in these Islands of the principle 
of separating secular and religious knowledge. This 
brilliant thinker, during the years in which he was exert 
ing himself in behalf of this principle, made a speech 
or discourse, on occasion of a public solemnity ; and in 
reference to the bearing of general knowledge upon reli 
gious belief, he spoke as follows : 

"As men," he said, " will no longer suffer themselves 
to be led blindfold in ignorance, so will they no more 
yield to the vile principle of judging and treating their 
fellow-creatures, not according to the intrinsic merit of 
their actions, but according to the accidental and in 
voluntary coincidence of their opinions. The great 
truth has finally gone forth to all the ends of the earth," 
and he prints it in capital letters, " that man shall no more 
render account to man for his belief, over which he has 
himself no control. Henceforward, nothing shall prevail 
upon us to praise or to blame any one for that which he 
can no more change, than he can the hue of his skin or 
the height of his stature."* You see, Gentlemen, if this 
philosopher is to decide the matter, religious ideas are 
just as far from being real, or representing anything 
beyond themselves, are as truly peculiarities, idiosyn- 
cracies, accidents of the individual, as his having the 
stature of a Patagonian, or the features of a Negro. 

But perhaps this was the rhetoric of an excited 
moment. Far from it, Gentlemen, or I should not have 
fastened on the words of a fertile mind, uttered so long 
ago. What Mr. Brougham laid down as a principle in 

* Mr. Brougham's Glasgow Discourse. 



Theology a Branch of Knowledge. 31 

1825, resounds on all sides of us, with ever-growing con 
fidence and success, in 1852. I open the Minutes of 
the Committee of Council on Education for the years 
1848-50, presented to both Houses of Parliament by com 
mand of Her Majesty, and I find one of Her Majesty's 
Inspectors of Schools, at p. 467 of the second volume, 
dividing " the topics usually embraced in the better class 
of primary schools" into four :--the knowledge of signs, 
as reading and writing ; of facts, as geography and 
astronomy ; of relations and lazvs, as mathematics ; and 
lastly sentiment, such as poetry and music. Now, on 
first catching sight of this division, it occurred to me to 
ask myself, before ascertaining the writer's own resolu 
tion of the matter, under which of these four heads 
would fall Religion, or whether it fell under any of them. 
Did he put it aside as a thing too delicate and sacred 
to be enumerated with earthly studies ? or did he dis 
tinctly contemplate it when he made his division? Any 
how, I could really find a place for it under the first 
head, or the second, or the third ; for it has to do 
with facts, since it tells of the Self-subsisting ; it has 
to do with relations, for it tells of the Creator ; it 
has to do with signs, for it tells of the due manner of 
speaking of Him. There was just one head of the 
division to which I could not refer it, viz., to sentiment ; 
for, I suppose, music and poetry, which are the writer's 
own examples of sentiment, have not much to do with 
Truth, which is the main object of Religion. Judge then 
my surprise, Gentlemen, when I found the fourth was 
the very head selected by the writer of the Report in 
question, as the special receptacle of religious topics. 
" The inculcation of sentiment" he says, " embraces read 
ing in its higher sense, poetry, music, together with 
moral and religious Education." I am far from intro- 



32 Discourse 1 7. 

ducing this writer for his own sake, because I have no 
wish to hurt the feelings of a gentleman, who is but 
exerting himself zealously in the discharge of anxious 
duties ; but, taking him as an illustration of the wide- 
spreading school of thought to which he belongs, I ask 
what can more clearly prove than a candid avowal like 
this, that, in the view of his school, Religion is not 
knowledge, has nothing whatever to do with knowledge, 
and is excluded from a University course of instruction, 
not simply because the exclusion cannot be helped, 
from political or social obstacles, but because it has no 
business there at all, because it is to be considered 
a taste, sentiment, opinion, and nothing more ? 

The writer avows this conclusion himself, in the ex 
planation into which he presently enters, in which he 
says : " According to the classification proposed, the 
essential idea of all religious Education will consist in the 
direct cultivation of \\\z feelings" What we contemplate, 
then, what we aim at, when we give a religious Educa 
tion, is, it seems, not to impart any knowledge whatever, 
but to satisfy anyhow desires after the Unseen which 
will arise in our minds in spite of ourselves, to provide the 
mind with a means of self-command, to impress on it the 
beautiful ideas which saints and sages have struck out, to 
embellish it with the bright hues of a celestial piety, to 
teach it the poetry of devotion, the music of well-ordered 
affections, and the luxury of doing good. As for the in 
tellect, its exercise happens to be unavoidable, whenever 
moral impressions are made, from the constitution of the 
human mind, but it varies in the results of that exercise, 
in the conclusions which it draws from our impressions, 
according to the peculiarities of the individual. 

Something like this seems to be the writer's mean< 
ing, but we need not pry into its finer issues in order to 



Theology a Branch of Knowledge. 33 

gain a distinct view of its general bearing ; and taking 
it, as I think we fairly may take it, as a specimen of the 
philosophy of the day, as adopted by those who are not 
conscious unbelievers, or open scoffers, I consider it 
amply explains how it comes to pass that this day's phi 
losophy sets up a system of universal knowledge, and 
teaches of plants, and earths, and creeping things, and 
beasts, and gases, about the crust of the earth and the 
changes of the atmosphere, about sun, moon, and stars, 
about man and his doings, about the history of the world, 
about sensation, memory, and the passions, about duty, 
about cause and effect, about all things imaginable, 
except one and that is, about Him that made all these 
things, about God. I say the reason is plain because 
they consider knowledge, as regards the creature, is 
illimitable, but impossible or hopeless as regards the 
being and attributes and works of the Creator. 

6. 

Here, however, it may be objected to me that this re 
presentation is certainly extreme, for the school in ques 
tion does, in fact, lay great stress on the evidence afforded 
by the creation, to the Being and Attributes of the 
Creator. I may be referred, for instance, to the words of 
one of the speakers on a memorable occasion. At the 
very time of laying the first stone of the University of 
London, I confess it, a learned person, since elevated to 
the Protestant See of Durham, which he still fills, opened 
the proceedings with prayer. He addressed the Deity, as 
the authoritative Report informs us, " the whole sur 
rounding assembly standing uncovered in solemn silence." 
" Thou," he said, in the name of all present, " thou hast 
constructed the vast fabric of the universe in so wonder 
ful a manner, so arranged its motions, and so formed its 

3 



34 Discourse II. 

productions, that the contemplation and study of thy 
works exercise at once the mind in the pursuit of human 
science, and lead it onwards to Divine Truth!' Here is 
apparently a distinct recognition that there is such a 
thing as Truth in the* province of Religion ; and, did the 
passage stand by itself, and were it the only means we 
possessed of ascertaining the sentiments of the powerful 
body whom this distinguished person there represented, 
it would, as far as it goes, be satisfactory. I admit it ; 
and I admit also the recognition of the Being and cer 
tain Attributes of the Deity, contained in the writings of 
the gifted person whom I have already quoted, whose 
genius, versatile and multiform as it is, in nothing has 
been so constant, as in its devotion to the advancement 
of knowledge, scientific and literary. He then certainly, 
in his " Discourse of the objects, advantages, and plea 
sures of science," after variously illustrating what he 
terms its " gratifying treats," crowns the catalogue with 
mention of " the higJiest of all our gratifications in the 
contemplation of science," which he proceeds to explain 
thus: 

" We are raised by them," says he, " to an understand 
ing of the infinite wisdom and goodness which the Creator 
his displayed in all His works. Not a step can be taken 
in any direction," he continues, "without perceiving the 
most extraordinary traces of design ; and the skill, every 
where conspicuous, is calculated in so vast a proportion 
of instances to promote the happiness of living creatures, 
and especially of ourselves, that we can feel no hesitation 
in concluding, that, if we knew the whole scheme of 
Providence, every part would be in harmony with a plan 
of absolute benevolence. Independent, however, of this 
most consoling inference, the delight is inexpressible, of 
being able to follow, as it were, with our eyes, the mar- 



Theology a Branch of Knowledge. 35 

vellous works of the Great Architect of Nature, to trace 
the unbounded power and exquisite skill which are 
exhibited in the most minute, as well as the mightiest 
parts of His system. The pleasure derived from this 
study is unceasing, and so various, that it never tires the 
appetite. But it is unlike the low gratifications of sense 
in another respect : it elevates and refines our nature, 
while those hurt the health, debase the understanding, 
and corrupt the feelings ; it teaches us to look upon all 
earthly objects as insignificant and below our notice, 
except the pursuit of knowledge and the cultivation of 
virtue, that is to say, the strict performance of our duty 
in every relation of society ; and it gives a dignity and 
importance to the enjoyment of life, which the frivolous 
and the grovelling cannot even comprehend." 

Such are the words of this prominent champion of 
Mixed Education. If logical inference be, as it un 
doubtedly is, an instrument of truth, surely, it may be 
answered to me, in admitting the possibility of inferring 
the Divine Being and Attributes from the phenomena 
of nature, he distinctly admits a basis of truth for the 
doctrines of Religion. 

7- 

I wish, Gentlemen, to give these representations their 
full weight, both from the gravity of the question, and 
the consideration due to the persons whom I am arraign 
ing ; but, before I can feel sure I understand them, I 
must ask an abrupt question. When I am told, then, by 
the partisans of Universities without Theological teaching, 
that human science leads'to belief in a Supreme Being, 
without denying the fact, nay, as a Catholic, with full 
conviction of it, nevertheless I am obliged to ask what 
the statement means in their mouths, what they, the 



36 Discourse II. 

speakers, understand by the word " God." Let me not 
be thought offensive, if I question, whether it means the 
same thing on the two sides of the controversy. With 
us Catholics, as with the first race of Protestants, as with 
Mahometans, and all Theists, the word contains, as I 
have already said, a theology in itself. At the risk of 
anticipating what I shall have occasion to insist upon in 
my next Discourse, let me say that, according to the 
teaching of Monotheism, God is an Individual, Self- 
dependent, All-perfect, Unchangeable Being ; intelligent, 
living, personal, and present ; almighty, all-seeing, all- 
remembering ; between whom and His creatures there is 
an infinite gulf ; who has no origin, who is all-sufficient 
for Himself; who created and upholds the universe ; who 
will judge every one of us, sooner or later, according to 
that Law of right and wrong which He has written on 
our hearts. He is One who is sovereign over, operative 
amidst, independent of, the appointments which He has 
made; One in whose hands are all things, who has a pur 
pose in every event, and a standard for every deed, and 
thus has relations of His own towards the subject-matter 
of each particular science which the book of knowledge 
unfolds ; who has with an adorable, never-ceasing energy 
implicated Himself in all the history of creation, the 
constitution of nature, the course of the world, the 
origin of society, the fortunes of nations, the action of the 
human mind ; and who thereby necessarily becomes the 
subject-matter of a science, far wider and more noble than 
any of those which are included in the circle of secular 
Education. 

This is the doctrine which" belief in a God implies in 
the mind of a Catholic : if it means any thing, it means 
all this, and cannot keep from meaning all this, and a 
great deal more ; and, even though there were nothing 



Theology a Branch of Knowledge. 37 

in the religious tenets of the last three centuries to dis 
parage dogmatic truth, still, even then, I should have 
difficulty in believing that a doctrine so mysterious, so 
peremptory, approved itself as a matter of course to 
educated men of this day, who gave their minds atten 
tively to consider it. Rather, in a state of society such 
as ours, in which authority, prescription, tradition, habit, 
moral instinct, and the divine influences go for nothing, 
in which patience of thought, and depth and consistency 
of view, are scorned as subtle and scholastic, in which 
free discussion and fallible judgment are prized as the 
birthright of each individual, I must be excused if I 
exercise towards this age, as regards its belief in this 
doctrine, some portion of that scepticism which it 
exercises itself towards every received but unscrutinized 
assertion whatever. I cannot take it for granted, I must 
have it brought home to me by tangible evidence, that 
the spirit of the age means by the Supreme Being what 
Catholics mean. Nay, it would be a relief to my mind 
to gain some ground of assurance, that the parties in 
fluenced by that spirit had, I will not say, a true apprehen 
sion of God, but even so much as the idea of what a true 
apprehension is. 

Nothing is easier than to use the word, and mean no 
thing by it. The heathens used to say, " God wills," 
when they meant " Fate ;" " God provides," when they 
meant " Chance ;" " God acts," when they meant " In 
stinct" or " Sense ;" and " God is every where," when 
they meant " the Soul of Nature." The Almighty is 
something infinitely different from a principle, or a 
centre of action, or a quality, or a generalization of 
phenomena. If, then, by the word, you do but mean a 
Being who keeps the world in order, who acts in it, but 
only in the way of general Providence, who acts towards 



38 Discourse II. 

us but only through what are called laws of Nature, 
who is more certain not to act at all than to act independ 
ent of those laws, who is known and approached indeed, 
but only through the medium of those laws ; such a God 
it is not difficult for any one to conceive, not difficult for 
any one to endure. If, I say, as you wduld revolu 
tionize society, so you would revolutionize heaven, if you 
have changed the divine sovereignty into a sort of con 
stitutional monarchy, in which the Throne has honour 
and ceremonial enough, but cannot issue the most 
ordinary command except through legal forms and 
precedents, and with the counter-signature of a minister, 
then belief in a God is no more than an acknowledgment 
of existing, sensible powers and phenomena, which none 
but an idiot can deny. If the Supreme Being is power 
ful or skilful, just so far forth as the telescope shows 
power, and the microscope shows skill, if His moral law 
is to be ascertained simply by the physical processes of 
the animal frame, or His will gathered from the im 
mediate issues of human affairs, if His Essence is just as 
high and deep and broad and long as the universe, 
and no more ; if this be the fact, then will I confess 
that there is no specific science about God, that theo 
logy is but a name, and a protest in its behalf an 
hypocrisy. Then is He but coincident with the laws of 
the universe ; then is He but a function, or correlative, 
or subjective reflection and mental impression, of each 
phenomenon of the material or moral world, as it flits 
before us. Then, pious as it is to think of Him, while 
the pageant of experiment or abstract reasoning passes 
by, still, such piety is nothing more than a poetry of 
thought or an ornament of language, and has not even 
an infinitesimal influence upon philosophy or science, of 
which it is rather the parasitical production. 



Theology a Branch of Knowledge. 39 

I understand, in that case, why Theology should require 
no specific teaching, for there is nothing to mistake 
about ; why it is powerless against scientific anticipations, 
for it merely is one of them ; why it is simply absurd in 
its denunciations of heresy, for heresy does not lie in the 
region of fact and experiment. I understand, in that 
case, how it is that the religious sense is but a " senti 
ment," and its exercise a " gratifying treat," for it is like 
the sense of the beautiful or the sublime. I understand 
how the contemplation of the universe "leads onwards to 
divine truth," for divine truth is not something separate 
from Nature, but it is Nature with a divine glow upon 
it. I understand the zeal expressed for Physical Theo 
logy, for this study is but a mode of looking at Physical 
Nature, a certain view taken of Nature, private and 
personal, which one man has, and another has not, which 
gifted minds strike out, which others see to be admirable 
and ingenious, and which all would be the better for 
adopting. It is but the theology of Nature, just as we 
talk of the philosophy or the romance of history, or the 
poetry of childhood, or the picturesque, or the sentimen 
tal, or the humorous, or any other abstract quality, which 
the genius or the caprice of the individual, or the fashion 
of the day, or the consent of the world, recognizes in 
any set of objects which are subjected to its contem 
plation. 

8. 

Such ideas of religion seem to me short of Monotheism ; 
I do not impute them to this or that individual who be 
longs to the school which gives them currency ; but what 
I read about the "gratification " of keeping pace in our 
scientific researches with "the Architect of Nature;" 
about the said gratification " giving a dignity and import 
ance to the enjoyment of life," and teaching us that 



40 Discourse tl. 

knowledge and our duties to society are the only earthly 
objects worth our notice, all this, I own it, Gentlemen, 
frightens me ; nor is Dr. Maltby's address to the Deity 
sufficient to reassure me. I do not see much difference 
between avowing that there is no God, and implying that 
nothing definite can for certain be known about Him ; 
and when I find Religious Education treated as the cul 
tivation of sentiment, and Religious Belief as the acci 
dental hue or posture of the mind, I am reluctantly but 
forcibly reminded of a very unpleasant page of Meta 
physics, viz., of the relations between God and Nature 
insinuated by such philosophers as Hume. This acute, 
though most low-minded of speculators, in his inquiry 
concerning the Human Understanding, introduces, as is 
well known, Epicurus, that is, a teacher of atheism, de 
livering an harangue to the Athenian people, not indeed 
in defence, but in extenuation of that opinion. His ob 
ject is to show that, whereas the atheistic view is nothing 
else than the repudiation of theory, and an accurate 
representation of phenomenon and fact, it cannot be 
dangerous, unless phenomenon and fact be dangerous. 
Epicurus is made to say, that the paralogism of philo 
sophy has ever been that of arguing from Nature in 
behalf of something beyond Nature, greater than Nature ; 
whereas, God, as he maintains, being known only 
through the visible world, our knowledge of Him is ab 
solutely commensurate with our knowledge of it, is 
nothing distinct from it, is but a mode of viewing it. 
Hence it follows that, provided we admit, as we cannot 
help admitting, the phenomena of Nature and the world, 
it is only a question of words whether or not we go on 
to the hypothesis of a second Being, not visible but im 
material, parallel and coincident with Nature, to whom 
we give the name of God. " Allowing," he says, " the 



Theology a Branch of Knowledge. 4 1 

gods to be the authors of the existence or order of the 
universe, it follows that they possess that precise degree 
of power, intelligence, and benevolence, which appears 
in their workmanship ; but nothing farther can be proved, 
except we call in the assistance of exaggeration and 
flattery to supply the defects of argument and reasoning. 
So far as the traces of any attributes, at present, appear, 
so far may we conclude these attributes to exist. The 
supposition of farther attributes is mere hypothesis ; 
much more the supposition that, in distant periods of 
place and time, there has been, or will be, a more magni 
ficent display of these attributes, and a scheme of admin 
istration more suitable to such imaginary virtues." 

Here is a reasoner, who would not hesitate to deny 
that there is any distinct science or philosophy possible 
concerning the Supreme Being ; since every single thing 
we know of Him is this or that or the other phenomenon, 
material or moral, which already falls under this or that 
natural science. In him then it would be only consistent 
to drop Theology in a course of University Education : 
but how is it consistent in any one who shrinks from his 
companionship ? I am glad to see that the author, 
several times mentioned, is in opposition to Hume, in 
one sentence of the quotation I have made from his 
Discourse upon Science, deciding, as he does, that the 
phenomena of the material world are insufficient for the 
full exhibition of the Divine Attributes, and implying 
that they require a supplemental process to complete 
and harmonize their evidence. But is not this supple 
mental process a science ? and if so, why not acknow 
ledge its existence ? If God is more than Nature, 
Theology claims a place among the sciences : but, on the 
other hand, if you are not sure of as much as this, how 
do you differ from Hume or Epicurus? 



42 Discourse IL 



9- 

I end then as I began : religious doctrine is knowledge. 
This is the important truth, little entered into at this day, 
which I wish that all wno have honoured me with their 
presence here would allow me to beg them to take away 
with them. I am not catching at sharp arguments, but 
laying down grave principles. Religious doctrine is 
knowledge, in as full a sense as Newton's doctrine is 
knowledge. University Teaching without Theology is 
simply unphilosophical. Theology has at least as good 
a right to claim a place there as Astronomy. 

In my next Discourse it will be my object to show 
that its omission from the list of recognised sciences is 
not only indefensible in itself, but prejudicial to all the 
rest 



43 



DISCOURSE III. 

BEARING OF THEOLOGY ON OTHER BRANCHES OF 
KNOWLEDGE. 

I. 

WHEN men of great intellect, who have long and 
intently and exclusively given themselves to the 
study or investigation of some one particular branch of 
secular knowledge, whose mental life is concentrated and 
hidden in their chosen pursuit, and who have neither 
eyes nor ears for any thing which does not immediately 
bear upon it, when such men are at length made to realize 
that there is a clamour all around them, which must be 
heard, for what they have been so little accustomed to 
place in the category of knowledge as Religion, and that 
they themselves are accused of disaffection to it, they are 
impatient at the interruption ; they call the demand 
tyrannical, and the requisitionists bigots or fanatics. 
They are tempted to say, that their only wish is to be 
let alone; for themselves, they are not dreaming of offend 
ing any one, or interfering with any one ; they are pur 
suing their own particular line, they have never spoken a 
word against any one's religion, whoever he may be, 
and never mean to do so. It does not follow that they 
deny the existence of a God, because they are not found 
talking of it, when the topic would be utterly irrelevant. 



44 Discoiirse ///. 

Ail they say is, that there are other beings in the world 
besides the Supreme Being; their business is with them. 
After all, the creation is not the Creator, nor things 
secular religious. Theology and human science are two 
things, not one, and have their respective provinces, 
contiguous it may be and cognate to each other, but not 
identical. When we are contemplating earth, we are not 
contemplating heaven ; and when we are contemplating 
heaven, we are not contemplating earth. Separate sub 
jects should be treated separately. As division of labour, 
so division of thought is the only means of successful 
application. " Let us go our own way," they say, " and 
you go yours. We do not pretend to lecture on Theology, 
and you have no claim to pronounce upon Science." 

With this feeling they attempt a sort of compromise, 
between their opponents who claim for Theology a free 
introduction into the Schools of Science, and themselves 
who would exclude it altogether, and it is this : viz., that 
it should remain indeed excluded from the public 
schools, but that it should be permitted in private, 
wherever a sufficient number of persons is found to 
desire it. Such persons, they seem to say, may have it 
all their own way, when they are by themselves, so that 
they do not attempt to disturb a comprehensive system 
of instruction, acceptable and useful to all, by the in 
trusion of opinions peculiar to their own minds. 

I am now going to attempt a philosophical answer to 
this representation, that is, to the project of teaching 
secular knowledge in the University Lecture Room, and 
remanding religious knowledge to the parish priest, the 
catechism, and the parlour ; and in doing so, you must 
pardon me, Gentlemen, if my subject should oblige me 
to pursue a lengthy and careful course of thought, which 
may be wearisome to the hearer : I begin then thus : 



Bearing of Theology on Other Knowledge. 45 



2. 

Truth is the object of Knowledge of whatever kind ; 
and when we inquire what is meant by Truth, I suppose 
it is right to answer that Truth means facts and their 
relations, which stand towards each other pretty much 
as subjects and predicates in logic. All that exists, as 
contemplated by the human mind, forms one large 
system or complex fact, and this of course resolves itself 
into an indefinite number of particular facts, which, as 
being portions of a whole, have countless relations of 
every kind, one towards another. Knowledge is the 
apprehension of these facts, whether in themselves, or in 
their mutual positions and bearings. And, as all taken 
together form one integral subject for Contemplation, so 
there are no natural or real limits between part and 
part ; one is ever running into another ; all, as viewed 
by the mind, are combined together, and possess a 
correlative character one with another, from the internal 
mysteries of the Divine Essence down to our own sen 
sations and consciousness, from the most solemn appoint 
ments of the Lord of all down to what may be called the 
accident of the hour, from the most glorious seraph down 
to the vilest and most noxious of reptiles. 

Now, it is not wonderful that, with all its capabilities, 
the human mind cannot take in this whole vast fact at a 
single glance, or gain possession of it at once. Like a 
short-sighted reader, its eye pores closely, and travels 
slowly, over the awful volume which lies open for its in 
spection. Or again, as we deal with some huge structure 
of many parts and sides, the mind goes round about it, 
noting down, first one thing, then another, as it best may, 
and viewing it under different aspects, by way of making 
progress towards mastering the whole. So by degrees 



46 Discourse III. 

and by circuitous advances does it rise aloft and subject 
to itself a knowledge of that universe into which it has 
been born. 

These various partial views or abstractions, by means 
of which the mind looks out upon its object, are called 
sciences, and embrace respectively larger or smaller por 
tions of the field of knowledge ; sometimes extending far 
and wide, but superficially, sometimes with exactness 
over particular departments, sometimes occupied together 
on one and the same portion, sometimes holding one part 
in common, and then ranging on this side or that in abso 
lute divergence one from the other. Thus Optics has for 
its subject the whole visible creation, so far forth as it is 
simply visible ; Mental Philosophy has a narrower pro 
vince, but a richer one. Astronomy, plane and physical, 
each has the same subject-matter, but views it or treats 
it differently; lastly, Geology and Comparative Anatomy 
have subject-matters partly the same, partly distinct. 
Now these views or sciences, as being abstractions, have 
far more to do with the relations of things than with 
things themselves. They tell us what things are, only or 
principally by telling us their relations, or assigning pre 
dicates to subjects ; and therefore they never tell us all 
that can be said about a thing, even when they tell some 
thing, nor do they bring it before us, as the senses do. 
They arrange and classify facts ; they reduce separate 
phenomena under a common law ; they trace effects to a 
cause. Thus they serve to transfer our knowledge from 
the custody of memory to the surer and more abiding 
protection of philosophy, thereby providing both for its 
spread and its advance : for, inasmuch as sciences are 
forms of knowledge, they enable the intellect to master 
and increase it ; and, inasmuch as they are instruments, 
to communicate it readily to others. Still, after all, they 



Bearing of Theology on Other Knowledge. 47 

proceed on the principle of a division of labour, even 
though that division is an abstraction, not a literal 
separation into parts ; and, as the maker of a bridle or 
an epaulet has not, on that account, any idea of the 
science of tactics or strategy, so in a parallel way, it is 
not every science which equally, nor any one which fully, 
enlightens the mind in the knowledge of things, as they 
are, or brings home to it the external object on which it 
wishes to gaze. Thus they differ in importance ; and 
according to their importance will be their influence, 
not only on the mass of knowledge to which they all 
converge and contribute, but on each other. 

Since then sciences are the results of mental processes 
about one and the same subject-matter, viewed under its 
various aspects, and are true results, as far as they go, 
yet at the same time separate and partial, it follows that 
on the one hand they need external assistance, one by 
one, by reason of their incompleteness, and on the other 
that they are able to afford it to each other, by reason, 
first, of their independence in themselves, and then of 
their connexion in their subject-matter. Viewed alto 
gether, they approximate to a representation or sub 
jective reflection of the objective truth, as nearly as is 
possible to the human mind, which advances towards the 
accurate apprehension of that object, in proportion to 
the number of sciences which it has mastered ; and 
which, when certain sciences are away, in such a case has 
but a defective apprehension, in proportion to the value 
of the sciences which are thus wanting, and the import 
ance of the field on which they are employed. 

3- 

Let us take, for instance, man himself as our object of 
contemplation ; then at once we shall find we can view 



48 Discourse III. 

him in a variety of relations ; and according to those 
relationsare thesciences of which he is the subject-matter, 
and according to our acquaintance with them is our pos 
session of a true knowledge of him. We may view him 
in relation to the material elements of his body, or to his 
mental constitution, or to his household and family, or 
to the community in which he lives, or to the Being who 
made him ; and in consequence we treat of him respec 
tively as physiologists, or as moral philosophers, or as 
writers of economics, or of politics, or as theologians. 
When we think of him in all these relations together, or 
as the subject at once of all the sciences I have named, 
then we may be said to reach unto and rest in the idea 
of man as an object or external fact, similar to that which 
the eye takes of his outward form. On the other hand, 
according as we are only physiologists, or only politicians, 
or only moralists, so is our idea of man more or less 
unreal; we do not take in the whole of him, and the 
defect is greater or less, in proportion as the relation is, 
or is not, important, which is omitted, whether his relation 
to God, or to his king, or to his children, or to his own 
component parts. And if there be one relation, about 
which we know nothing at all except that it exists, then 
is our knowledge of him, confessedly and to our own 
consciousness, deficient and partial, and that, I repeat, 
in proportion to the importance of the relation. 

That therefore is true of sciences in general which we 
are apt to think applies only to pure mathematics, though 
to pure mathematics it applies especially, viz., that they 
cannot be considered as simple representations or in 
formants of things as they are. We are accustomed tc 
say, and say truly, that the conclusions of pure mathe 
matics are applied, corrected, and adapted, by mixed ; 
but so too the conclusions of Anatomy, Chemistry, 



Bearing of Theology on Other Knowledge. 49 

Dynamics, and other sciences, are revised and completed 
by each other. Those several conclusions do not represent 
whole and substantive things, but views, true, so far 
as they go ; and in order to ascertain how far they 
do go, that is, how far they correspond to the object 
to which they belong, we must compare them with the 
views taken out of that object by other sciences. Did 
we proceed upon the abstract theory of forces, we should 
assign a much more ample range to a projectile than in 
fact the resistance of the air allows it to accomplish. 
Let, however, that resistance be made the subject of 
scientific analysis, and then we shall have a new 
science, assisting, and to a certain point completing, for 
the benefit of questions of fact, the science of projection. 
On the other hand, the science of projection itself, con 
sidered as belonging to the forces it contemplates, is 
not more perfect, as such, by this supplementary in 
vestigation. And in like manner, as regards the whole 
circle of sciences, one corrects another for purposes of 
fact, and one without the other cannot dogmatize, except 
hypothetically and upon its own abstract principles. For 
instance, the Newtonian philosophy requires the admis 
sion of certain metaphysical postulates, if it is to be more 
than a theory or an hypothesis ; as, for instance, that 
what happened yesterday will happen to-morrow; that 
there is such a thing as matter, that our senses are trust 
worthy, that there is a logic of induction, and so on. 
Now to Newton metaphysicians grant all that he asks ; 
but, if so be, they may not prove equally accommodating 
to another who asks something else, and then all his 
most logical conclusions in the science of physics would 
remain hopelessly on the stocks, though finished, and 
never could be launched into the sphere of fact. 

Again, did I know nothing about the movement of 

4 



50 Discourse 11 L 

bodies, except what the theory of gravitation supplies, 
were I simply absorbed in that theory so as to make 
it measure all motion on earth and in the sky, I should 
indeed come to many right conclusions, I should hit off 
many important facts; ascertain many existing relations, 
and correct many popular errors : I should scout and 
ridicule with great success the old notion, that light bodies 
flew up and heavy bodies fell down ; but I should go on 
with equal confidence to deny the phenomenon of capil 
lary attraction. Here I should be wrong, but only be 
cause I carried out my science irrespectively of other 
sciences. In like manner, did I simply give myself to 
the investigation of the external action of body upon 
body, I might scoff at the very idea of chemical affinities 
and combinations, and reject it as simply unintelligible. 
Were I a mere chemist, I should deny the influence of 
mind upon bodily health ; and so on, as regards the 
devotees of any science, or family of sciences, to the ex 
clusion of others ; they necessarily become bigots and 
quacks, scorning all principles and reported facts which 
do not belong to their own pursuit, and thinking to effect 
everything without aid from any other quarter. Thus, 
before now, chemistry has been substituted for medicine ; 
and again, political economy, or intellectual enlighten 
ment, or the reading of the Scriptures, has been cried up 
as a panacea against vice, malevolence, and misery. 

4- 

Summing up, Gentlemen, what I have said, I lay it 
down that all knowledge forms one whole, because its 
subject-matter is one ; for the universe in its length and 
breadth is so intimately knit together, that we cannot 
separate off portion from portion, and operation from 
operation, except by a mental abstraction ; and then 






Bearing of Theology on Other Knowledge. 5 1 

again, as to its Creator, though He of course in His own 
Being is infinitely separate from it, and Theology has its 
departments towards which human knowledge has no 
relations, yet He has so implicated Himself with it, and 
taken it into His very bosom, by His presence in it, His 
providence over it, His impressions upon it, and His 
influences. through it, that we cannot truly or fully con 
template it without in some main aspects contemplating 
Him. Next, sciences are the results of that mental 
abstraction, which I have spoken of, being the logical 
record of this or that aspect of the whole subject-matter 
of knowledge. As they all belong to one and the same 
circle of objects, they are one and all connected to 
gether ; as they are but aspects of things, they are 
severally incomplete in their relation to the things them 
selves, though complete in their own idea and for their 
own respective purposes ; on both accounts they at once 
need and subserve each other. And further, the com 
prehension of the bearings of one science on another, 
and the use of each to each, and the location and limi 
tation and adjustment and due appreciation of them all, 
one with another, this belongs, I conceive, to a sort of 
science distinct from all of them, and in some sense a 
science of sciences, which is my own conception of what 
is meant by Philosophy, in the true sense of the word, 
and of a philosophical habit of mind, and which in these 
Discourses I shall call by that name. This is what I 
have to say about knowledge and philosophical know 
ledge generally ; and now I proceed to apply it to the 
particular science, which has led me to draw it out. 

I say, then, that the systematic omission of any one 
science from the catalogue prejudices the accuracy and 
completeness of our knowledge altogether, and that, in 
proportion to its importance. Not even Theology itself, 



52 Discourse III. 

though it comes from heaven, though its truths were 
given once for all at the first, though they are more 
certain on account of the Giver than those of mathe 
matics, not even Theology, so far as it is relative to us, 
or is the Science of Religion, do I exclude from the law 
to which every mental exercise is subject, viz., from that 
imperfection, which ever must attend the abstract, when 
it would determine the concrete. Nor do I speak only 
of Natural Religion ; for even the teaching of the Catho 
lic Church, in certain of its aspects, that is, its religious 
teaching, is variously influenced by the other sciences. 
Not to insist on the introduction of the Aristotelic philo 
sophy into its phraseology, its explanation of dogmas 
is influenced by ecclesiastical acts or events ; its inter 
pretations of prophecy are directly affected by the issues 
of history; its comments upon Scripture by the con 
clusions of the astronomer and the geologist ; and its 
casuistical decisions by the various experience, political, 
social, and psychological, with which times and places 
are ever supplying it. 

What Theology gives, it has a right to take ; or rather, 
the interests of Truth oblige it to take. If we would not 
be beguiled by dreams, if we would ascertain facts as 
they are, then, granting Theology is a real science, \ve 
cannot exclude it, and still call ourselves philosophers. 
I have asserted nothing as yet as to the pre-eminent 
dignity of Religious Truth ; I only say, if there be 
Religious Truth at all, we cannot shut our eyes to it 
without prejudice to truth of every kind, physical, meta 
physical, historical, and moral ; for it bears upon all 
truth. And thus I answer the objection with which I 
opened this Discourse. I supposed the question put to 
me by a philosopher of the day, " Why cannot you go 
your way, and let us go ours ?" I answer, in the name 



Bearing of Theology on Other Knowledge. 53 

of the Science of Religion, "When Newton can dis 
pense with the metaphysician, then may you dispense 
with us." So much at first sight ; now I am going on to 
claim a little more for Theology, by classing it with 
branches of knowledge which may with greater decency 
be compared to it. 

5- 

Let us see, then, how this supercilious treatment of so 
momentous a science, for momentous it must be, if there 
be a God, runs in a somewhat parallel case. The great 
philosopher of antiquity, when he would enumerate the 
causes of the things that take place in the world, after 
making mention of those which he considered to be 
physical and material, adds, " and the mind and every 
thing which is by means of man."* Certainly ; it would 
have been a preposterous course, when he would trace 
the effects he saw around him to their respective sources, 
had he directed his exclusive attention upon some one 
class or order of originating principles, and ascribed 
to these everything which happened anywhere. It 
would indeed have been unworthy a genius so curious, 
so penetrating, so fertile, so analytical as Aristotle's, to 
have laid it down that everything on the face of the 
earth could be accounted for by the material sciences, 
without the hypothesis of moral agents. It is incredible 
that in the investigation of physical results he could 
ignore so influential a being as man, or forget that, not 
only brute force and elemental movement, but know 
ledge also is power. And this so much the more, inas 
much as moral and spiritual agents belong to another, 
not to say a higher, order than physical ; so that the 
omission supposed would not have been merely an 

* Arist. Flthic. Nicom., iii. 3. 



54 Discourse III. 

oversight in matters of detail, but a philosophical error, 
and a fault in division. 

However, we live in an age of the world when the 
career of science and literature is little affected by what 
was done, or would have been done, by this venerable 
authority ; so, we will suppose, in England or Ireland, in 
the middle of the nineteenth century, a set of persons of 
name and celebrity to meet together, in spite of Aristotle, 
in order to adopt a line of proceeding which they conceive 
the circumstances of the time render imperative. We will 
suppose that a difficulty just now besets the enunciation 
and discussion of all matters of science, in consequence 
of the extreme sensitiveness of large classes of the com 
munity, clergy and laymen, on the subjects of necessity, 
responsibility, the standard of morals, and the nature of 
virtue. Parties run so high, that the only way of avoid 
ing constant quarrelling in defence of this or that side of 
the question is, in the judgment of the persons I am sup 
posing, to shut up the subject of anthropology altogether. 
This is accordingly done. Henceforth man is to be as if 
he were not, in the general course of Education ; the moral 
and mental sciences are to have no professorial chairs, 
and the treatment of them is to be simply left as a matter 
of private judgment, which each individual may carry out 
as he will. I can just fancy such a prohibition ab 
stractedly possible ; but one thing I cannot fancy pos 
sible, viz., that the parties in question, after this sweeping 
act of exclusion, should forthwith send out proposals on 
the basis of such exclusion for publishing an Encyclo 
paedia, or erecting a National University. 

It is necessary, however, Gentlemen, for the sake of the 
illustration which I am setting before you, to imagine 
what cannot be. I say, let us imagine a project for 
organizing a system of scientific teaching, in which the 



Bearing of Theology on Other Knowledge. 55 

agency of man in the material world cannot allowably 
be recognized, and may allowably be denied. Physical 
and mechanical causes are exclusively to be treated of ; 
volition is a forbidden subject. A prospectus is put out, 
with a list of sciences, we will say, Astronomy, Optics, 
Hydrostatics, Galvanism, Pneumatics, Statics, Dynamics, 
Pure Mathematics, Geology, Botany, Physiology, Ana 
tomy, and so forth ; but not a word about the mind and 
its powers, except what is said in explanation of the 
omission. That explanation is to the effect that the 
parties concerned in the undertaking have given long and 
anxious thought to the subject, and have been reluctantly 
driven to the conclusion that it is simply impracticable 
to include in the list of University Lectures the Philo 
sophy of Mind. What relieves, however, their regret is 
the reflection, that domestic feelings and polished man 
ners are best cultivated in the family circle and in good 
society, in the observance of the sacred ties which unite 
father, mother, and child, in the correlative claims and 
duties of citizenship, in the exercise of disinterested 
loyalty and enlightened patriotism. With this apology, 
such as it is, they pass over the consideration of the 
human mind and its powers and works, "in solemn 
silence," in their scheme of University Education. 

Let a charter be obtained for it ; let professors be ap 
pointed, lectures given, examinations passed, degrees 
awarded : what sort of exactness or trustworthiness, 
what philosophical largeness, will attach to views formed 
in an intellectual atmosphere thus deprived of some of 
the constituent elements of daylight ? What judgment 
will foreign countries and future times pass on the labours 
of the most acute and accomplished of the philosophers 
who have been parties to so portentous an unreality ? 
Here are professors gravely lecturing on medicine, or 



56 Discourse II L 

history, or political economy, who, so far from being bound 
to acknowledge, are free to scoff at the action of mind 
upon matter, or of mind upon mind, or the claims of 
mutual justice and charity. Common sense indeed and 
public opinion set bounds at first to so intolerable a 
licence ; yet, as time goes on, an omission which was 
originally but a matter of expedience, commends itself 
to the reason ; and at length a professor is found, more 
hardy than his brethren, still however, as he himself main 
tains, with sincere respect for domestic feelings and good 
manners, who takes on him to deny psychology in toto, 
to pronounce the influence of mind in the visible world 
a superstition, and to account for every effect which is 
found in the world by the operation of physical causes. 
Hitherto intelligence and volition were accounted real 
powers ; the muscles act, and their action cannot be repre 
sented by any scientific expression ; a stone flies out of the 
hand and the propulsive force of the muscle resides in the 
will ; but there has been a revolution, or at least a new 
theory in philosophy, and our Professor, I say, after speak 
ing with the highest admiration of the human intellect, 
limits its independent action to the region of speculation, 
and denies that it can be a motive principle, or can exer 
cise a special interference, in the material world. He 
ascribes every work, every external act of man, to the 
innate force or soul of the physical universe. He observes 
that spiritual agents are so mysterious and unintelligible, 
so uncertain in their laws, so vague in their operation, so 
sheltered from experience, that a wise man will have 
nothing to say to them. They belong to a different 
order of causes, which he leaves to those whose pro 
fession it is to investigate them, and he confines himself 
to the tangible and sure. Human exploits, human devices, 
human deeds, human productions, all that comes under 



Bearing of Theology on Other Knowledge. 57 

the scholastic terms of" genius " and " art," and the meta 
physical ideas of " duty," " right," and " heroism," it is 
his office to contemplate all these merely in their place 
in the eternal system of physical cause and effect. At 
length he undertakes to show how the whole fabric of 
material civilization has arisen from the constructive 
powers of physical elements and physical laws. He 
descants upon palaces, castles, temples, exchanges, bridges, 
causeways, and shows that they never could have grown 
into the imposing dimensions which they present to us, 
but for the laws of gravitation and the cohesion of part 
with part. The pillar would come down, the loftier the 
more speedily, did not the centre of gravity fall within its 
base ; and the most admired dome of Palladio or of Sir 
Christopher would give way, were it not for the happy 
principle of the arch. He surveys the complicated 
machinery of a single day's arrangements in a private 
family ; our dress, our furniture, our hospitable board ; 
what would become of them, he asks, but for the laws of 
physical nature? Those laws are the causes of our 
carpets, our furniture, our travelling, and our social inter 
course. Firm stitches have a natural power, in propor 
tion to the toughness of the material adopted, to keep 
together separate portions of cloth ; sofas and chairs 
could not turn upside down, even if they would ; and it 
is a property of caloric to relax the fibres of animal 
matter, acting through water in one way, through oil in 
another, and this is the whole mystery of the most 
elaborate cuisine: but I should be tedious if I con 
tinued the illustration. 

6. 

Now, Gentlemen, pray understand how it is to be here 
applied. I am not supposing that the principles of 



58 Discourse III. 

Theology and Psychology are the same, or arguing from 
the works of man to the works of God, which Paley has 
done, which Hume has protested against. I am not 
busying myself to prove the existence and attributes of 
God, by means of the Argument from design. I am 
not proving anything at all about the Supreme Being. 
On the contrary, I am assuming His existence, and I do 
but say this : that, man existing, no University Pro 
fessor, who had suppressed in physical lectures the idea 
of volition, who did not take volition for granted, could 
escape a one-sided, a radically false view of the things 
which he discussed ; not indeed that his own definitions, 
principles, and laws would be wrong, or his abstract 
statements, but his considering his own study to be the 
key of everything that takes place on the face of the 
earth, and his passing over anthropology, this would be 
his error. I say, it would not be his science which was 
untrue, but his so-called knowledge which was unreal. 
He would be deciding on facts by means of theories. 
The various busy world, spread out before our eyes, is 
physical, but it is more than physical ; and, in making 
its actual system identical with his scientific analysis, 
formed on a particular aspect, such a Professor as I have 
imagined was betraying a want of philosophical depth, 
and an ignorance of what an University Teaching ought 
to be. He was no longer a teacher of liberal knowledge, 
but a narrow-minded bigot. While his doctrines pro 
fessed to be conclusions formed upon an hypothesis or 
partial truth, they were undeniable ; not so if they pro 
fessed to give results in facts which he could grasp and 
take possession of. Granting, indeed, that a man's arm 
is moved by a simple physical cause, then of course we 
may dispute about the various external influences which, 
when it changes its position, sway it to a^nd fro. like a 



Bearing of Theology mi Other Knowledge. 59 

scarecrow in a garden ; but to assert that the motive 
cause is physical, this is an assumption in a case, when 
our question is about a matter of fact, not about the 
logical consequences of an assumed premiss. And, in 
like manner, if a people prays, and the wind changes, the 
rain ceases, the sun shines, and the harvest is safely 
housed, when no one expected it, our Professor may, if 
he will, consult the barometer, discourse about the 
atmosphere, and throw what has happened into an 
equation, ingenious, even though it be not true ; but, 
should he proceed to rest the phenomenon, in matter of 
fact, simply upon a physical cause, to the exclusion of a 
divine, and to say that the given case actually belongs to 
his science because other like cases do, I must tell him, 
Ne sutor ultra crepidam : he is making his particular 
craft usurp and occupy the universe. This then is the 
drift of my illustration. If the creature is ever setting in 
motion an endless series of physical causes and effects, 
much more is the Creator ; and as our excluding volition 
from our range of ideas is a denial of the soul, so our 
ignoring Divine Agency is a virtual denial of God. 
Moreover, supposing man can will and act of himself in 
spite of physics, to shut up this great truth, though one, 
is to put our whole encyclopaedia of knowledge out of 
joint ; and supposing God can will and act of Himself in 
this world which He has made, and we deny or slur it 
over, then we are throwing the circle of universal science 
into a like, or a far worse confusion. 

Worse incomparably, for the idea of God, if there be 
a God, is infinitely higher than the idea of man, if there 
be man. If to 61ot out man's agency is to deface the 
book of knowledge, on the supposition of that agency 
existing, what must it be, supposing it exists, to blot out 
the agency of God ? I have hitherto been engaged in 



60 Discourse III. 

showing that all the sciences come to us as one, that 
they all relate to one and the same integral subject- 
matter, that each separately is more or less an abstrac 
tion, wholly true as an hypothesis, but not wholly trust 
worthy in the concrete, conversant with relations more 
than with facts, with principles more than with agents, 
needing the support and guarantee of its sister sciences, 
and giving in turn while it takes : from which it follows, 
that none can safely be omitted, if we would obtain the 
exactest knowledge possible of things as they are, and 
that the omission is more or less important, in propor 
tion to the field which each covers, and the depth to 
which it penetrates, and the order to which it belongs ; 
for its loss is a positive privation of an influence which 
exerts itself in the correction and completion of the rest. 
This is a general statement ; but now as to Theology in 
particular, what, in matter of fact, are its pretensions, 
what its importance, what its influence upon other 
branches of knowledge, supposing there be a God, which 
it would not become me to set about proving ? Has it 
vast dimensions, or does it lie in a nutshell ? Will its 
omission be imperceptible, or will it destroy the equili 
brium of the whole system of Knowledge ? This is the 
inquiry to which I proceed. 

7- 

Now what is Theology ? First, I will tell you what it 
is not. And here, in the first place (though of course I 
speak on the subject as a Catholic), observe that, strictly 
speaking, I am not assuming that Catholicism is true, 
while I make myself the champion of Theology. 
Catholicism has not formally entered into my argument 
hitherto, nor shall I just now assume any principle 
peculiar to it, for reasons which will appear in the sequel, 



Bearing of Theology on Other Knowledge. 6 1 

though of course I shall use Catholic language. Neither, 
secondly, will I fall into the fashion of the day, of identi 
fying Natural Theology with Physical Theology ; which 
said Physical Theology is a most jejune study, considered 
as a science, and really is no science at all, for it is 
ordinarily nothing more than a series of pious or polemical 
remarks upon the physical world viewed religiously, 
whereas the word " Natural " properly comprehends man 
and society, and all that is involved therein, as the great 
Protestant writer, Dr. Butler, shows us. Nor, in the third 
place, do I mean by Theology polemics of any kind ; for 
instance, what are called " the Evidences of Religion," 
or " the Christian Evidences ;" for, though these constitute 
a science supplemental to Theology and are necessary 
in their place, they are not Theology itself, unless an 
army is synonymous with the body politic. Nor, fourthly, 
do I mean by Theology that vague thing called " Chris 
tianity," or " our common Christianity," or " Christianity 
the law of the land," if there is any man alive who can 
tell what it is. I discard it, for the very reason that it 
cannot throw itself into a proposition. Lastly, I do not 
understand by Theology, acquaintance with the Scrip 
tures ; for, though no person of religious feelings can 
read Scripture but he will find those feelings roused, 
and gain much knowledge of history into the bargain, 
yet historical reading and religious feeling are not science. 
I mean none of these things by Theology, I simply 
mean the Science of God, or the truths we know about 
God put into system ; just as we have a science of the 
stars, and call it astronomy, or of the crust of the earth, 
and call it geology. 

For instance, I mean, for this is the main point, that, 
as in the human frame there is a living principle, acting 
upon it and through it by means of volition, so, behind 



62 Discourse III. 

the veil of the visible universe, there is an invisible, 
intelligent Being, acting on and through it, as and when 
He will. Further, I mean that this invisible Agent is in 
no sense a soul of the world, after the analogy of human 
nature, but, on the contrary, is absolutely distinct from 
the world, as being its Creator, Upholder, Governor, and 
Sovereign Lord. Here we are at once brought into the 
circle of doctrines which the idea of God embodies. I 
mean then by the Supreme Being, one who is simply 
self-dependent, and the only Being who is such ; moreover, 
that He is without beginning or Eternal, and the only 
Eternal ; that in consequence He has lived a whole 
eternity by Himself; and hence that He is all-sufficient, 
sufficient for His own blessedness, and all-blessed, and 
ever-blessed. Further, I mean a Being, who, having 
these prerogatives, has the Supreme Good, or rather is 
the Supreme Good, or has all the attributes of Good in 
infinite intenseness ; all wisdom, all truth, all justice, all 
love, all holiness, all beautifulness ; who is omnipotent, 
omniscient, omnipresent; ineffably one, absolutely perfect; 
and such, that what we do not know and cannot even 
imagine of Him, is far more wonderful than what we do 
and can. I mean One who is sovereign over His own will 
and actions, though always according to the eternal Rule 
of right and wrong, which is Himself. I mean, moreover, 
that He created all things out of nothing, and preserves 
them every moment, and could destroy them as easily as 
He made them; and that, in consequence, He is separated 
from them by an abyss, and is incommunicable in all 
His attributes. And further, He has stamped upon all 
things, in the hour of their creation, their respective 
natures, and has given them their work and mission and 
their length of days, greater or less, in their appointed 
place. I mean, too, that He is ever present with His 



Bearing of Theology on Other Knowledge. 63 

works, one by one, and confronts every thing He has 
made by His particular and most loving Providence, .and 
manifests Himself to each according to its needs ; and 
has on rational beings imprinted the moral law, and 
given them power to obey it, imposing on them the duty 
of worship and service, searching and scanning them 
through and through with His omniscient eye, and 
putting before them a present trial and a judgment to 
come. 

Such is what Theology teaches about God, a doctrine, 
as the very idea of its subject-matter presupposes, so 
mysterious as in its fulness to lie beyond any system, 
and in particular aspects to be simply external to nature, 
and to seem in parts even to be irreconcileable with 
itself, the imagination being unable to embrace what the 
reason determines. It teaches of a Being infinite, yet 
personal ; all-blessed, yet ever operative ; absolutely 
separate from the creature, yet in every part of the 
creation at every moment ; above all things, yet under 
every thing. It teaches of a Being who, though the 
highest, yet in the work of creation, conservation, 
government, retribution, makes Himself, as it were, the 
minister and servant of all ; who, though inhabiting 
eternity, allows Himself to take an interest, and to have 
a sympathy, in the matters of space and time. His are 
all beings, visible and invisible, the noblest and the vilest 
of them. His are the substance, and the operation, and 
the results of that system of physical nature into which 
we are born. His too are the powers and achievements 
of the intellectual essences, on which He has bestowed 
an independent action and the gift of origination. The 
laws of the universe, the principles of truth, the relation 
of one thing to another, their qualities and virtues, the 
order and harmony of the whole, all that exists, is from 



64 Discourse III. 

Him ; and, if evil is not from Him, as assuredly it is not, 
this is because evil has no substance of its own, but is 
only the defect, excess, perversion, or corruption of that 
which has substance. All we see, hear, and touch, the re 
mote sidereal firmament, as well as our own sea and l?.nd, 
and the elements which compose them, and the ordinances 
they obey, are His. The primary atoms of matter, their 
properties, their mutual action, their disposition and 
collocation, electricity, magnetism, gravitation, light, and 
whatever other subtle principles or operations the wit of 
man is detecting or shall detect, are the work of His 
hands. From Him has been every movement which 
has convulsed and re-fashioned the surface of the earth. 
The most insignificant or unsightly insect is from Him, 
and good in its kind ; the ever-teeming, inexhaustible 
swarms of animalculae, the myriads of living motes in 
visible to the naked eye, the restless ever-spreading 
vegetation which creeps like a garment over the whole 
earth, the lofty cedar, the umbrageous banana, are His. 
His are the tribes and families of birds and beasts, their 
graceful forms, their wild gestures, and their passionate 
cries. 

And so in the intellectual, moral, social, and political 
world. Man, with his motives and works, his languages, 
his propagation, his diffusion, is from Him. Agriculture, 
medicine, and the arts of life, are His gifts. Society, 
laws, government, He is their sanction. The pageant of 
earthly royalty has the semblance and the benediction 
of the Eternal King. Peace and civilization, commerce 
and adventure, wars when just, conquest when humane 
and necessary, have His co-operation, and His blessing 
upon them. The course of events, the revolution of 
empires, the rise and fall of states, the periods and eras, 
the progresses and the retrogressions of the world's 



Bearing of Jlieology on Other Knowledge. 65 

history, not indeed the incidental sin, over-abundant as 
it is, but the great outlines and the results of human 
affairs, are from His disposition. The elements and 
types and seminal principles and constructive powers of 
the moral world, in ruins though it be, are to be referred 
to Him. He " enlighteneth every man that cometh into 
this world." His are the dictates of the moral sense, and 
the retributive reproaches of conscience. To Him must 
be ascribed the rich endowments of the intellect, the 
irradiation of genius, the imagination of the poet, the 
sagacity of the politician, the wisdom (as Scripture calls 
it), which now rears and decorates the Temple, now 
manifests itself in proverb or in parable. The old saws 
of nations, the majestic precepts of philosophy, the 
luminous maxims of law, the oracles of individual wis 
dom, the traditionary rules of truth, justice, and religion, 
even though imbedded in the corruption, or alloyed with 
the pride, of the world, betoken His original agency, and 
His long-suffering presence. Even where there is habi 
tual rebellion against Him, or profound far-spreading 
social depravity, still the undercurrent, or the heroic out 
burst, of natural virtue, as well as the yearnings of the 
heart after what it has not, and its presentiment of its 
true remedies, are to be ascribed to the Author of all 
c^ood. Anticipations or reminiscences of His glory haunt 
the mind of the self-sufficient sage, and of the pagan 
devotee ; His writing is upon the wall, whether of the 
Indian fane, or of the porticoes of Greece. He introduces 
Himself, He all but concurs, according to His good plea 
sure, and in His selected season, in the issues of unbelief, 
superstition, and false worship, and He changes the cha 
racter of acts by His overruling operation. He conde 
scends, though He gives no sanction, to the altars and 
shrines of imposture, and He makes His own fiat the 

5 



66 Discourse IIL 

substitute for its sorceries. He speaks amid the incan 
tations of Balaam, raises Samuel's spirit in the witch's 
cavern, prophesies of the Messias by the tongue of the 
Sibyl, forces Pythqn to recognize His ministers, and 
baptizes by the hand of the misbeliever. He is with the 
heathen dramatist in his denunciations of injustice and 
tyranny, and his auguries of divine vengeance upon 
crime. Even on the unseemly legends of a popular 
mythology He casts His shadow, and is dimly discerned 
in the ode or the epic, as in troubled water or in fan 
tastic dreams. All that is good, all that is true, all that 
is beautiful, all that is beneficent, be it great or small, be it 
perfect or fragmentary, natural as well as supernatural, 
moral as well as material, comes from Him. 

8. 

If this be a sketch, accurate in substance and as far as 
it goes, of the doctrines proper to Theology, and espe 
cially of the doctrine of a particular Providence, which is 
the portion of it most on a level with human "sciences, I 
cannot understand at all how, supposing it to be true, it 
can fail, considered as knowledge, to exert a powerful 
influence on philosophy, literature, and every intellectual 
creation or discovery whatever. I cannot understand 
how it is possible, as the phrase goes, to blink the ques 
tion of its truth or falsehood. It meets us with a pro 
fession and a proffer of the highest truths of which the 
human mind is capable ; it embraces a range of subjects 
the most diversified and distant from each other. What 
science will not find one part or other of its province 
traversed by its path ? What results of philosophic 
speculation are unquestionable, if they have been gained 
without inquiry as to what Theology had to say to them ? 
Does it cast no light upon history? has it no influence 



Bearing of Theology on Other Knowledge. 67 

upon the principles of ethics ? is it without any sort of 
bearing on physics, metaphysics, and political science ? 
Can we drop it out of the circle of knowledge, without 
allowing, either that that circle is thereby mutilated, or on 
the other hand, that Theology is really no science ? 

And this dilemma is the more inevitable, because 
Theology is so precise and consistent in its intellectual 
structure. When I speak of Theism or Monotheism, 1 
am not throwing together discordant doctrines ; I am 
not merging belief, opinion, persuasion, of whatever kind, 
into a shapeless aggregate, by the help of ambiguous 
words, and dignifying this medley by the name of 
Theology. 1 speak of one idea unfolded in its just pro 
portions, carried out upon an intelligible method, and 
issuing in necessary and immutable results ; understood 
indeed at one time and place better than at another, 
held here and there with more or less of inconsistency, 
but still, after all, in all times and places, where it is found, 
the evolution, not of half-a-dozen ideas, but of one. 

9- 

And here I am led to another and most important 
point in the argument in its behalf, I mean its wide re 
ception. Theology, as I have described it, is no accident 
of particular minds, as are certain systems, for instance, 
of prophetical interpretation. It is not the sudden birth of 
a crisis, as the Lutheran or Wesleyan doctrine. It is not 
the splendid development of some uprising philosophy, 
as the Cartesian or Platonic. It is not the fashion of a 
season, as certain medical treatments may be considered, 
It has had a place, if not possession, in the intellectual 
world from time immemorial ; it has been received by 
minds the most various, and in systems of religion the 
most hostile to each other. It has prima facie claims 



68 Discourse HI. 

upon us, so imposing, that it can only be rejected on the 
ground of those claims being nothing more than impos 
ing, that is, being false. As to our own countries, it 
occupies our language, it meets us at every turn in our 
literature, it is the secret assumption, too axiomatic to be 
distinctly professed, of all our writers ; nor can we help 
assuming it ourselves, except by the most unnatural 
vigilance. Whoever philosophizes, starts \vith it, and 
introduces it, when he will, without any apology. Bacon, 
Hooker, Taylor, Cudworth, Locke, Newton, Clarke, 
Berkeley, and Butler, and it would be as easy to find 
more, as difficult to find greater names among English 
authors, inculcate or comment upon it. Men the most 
opposed, in creed or cast of mind, Addison and Johnson, 
Shakespeare and Milton, Lord Herbert and Baxter, 
herald it forth. Nor is it an English or a Protestant 
notion only ; you track it across the Continent, you 
pursue it into former ages. When was the world with 
out it ? Have the systems of Atheism or Pantheism, as 
sciences, prevailed in the literature of nations, or received 
a formation or attained a completeness such as Mono 
theism ? We find it in old Greece, and even in Rome, 
as well as in Judea and the East. We find it in 
popular literature, in philosophy, in poetry, as a positive 
and settled teaching, differing not at all in the appear 
ance it presents, whether in Protestant England, or in 
schismatical Russia, or in the Mahometan populations, 
or in the Catholic Church. If ever there was a subject 
of thought, which had earned by prescription to be 
received among the studies of a University, and which 
could not be rejected except on the score of convicted 
imposture, as astrology or alchemy ; if there be a science 
anywhere, which at least could claim not to be ignored, 
but to be entertained, and either distinctly accepted or 



Bearing of Theology on Other Knowledge. 69 

distinctly reprobated, or rather, which cannot be passed 
over in a scheme of universal instruction, without involv 
ing a positive denial of its truth, it is this ancient, this 
far-spreading philosophy. 

10. 

And now, Gentlemen, F may bring a somewhat tedious 
discussion to a close. It will not take many words to 
sum up what I have been urging. I say then, if the 
various branches of knowledge, which are the matter of 
teaching in a University, so hang together, that none 
can be neglected without prejudice to the perfection of 
the rest, and if Theology be a branch of knowledge, of 
wide reception, of philosophical structure, of unutterable 
importance, and of supreme influence, to what con 
clusion are we brought from these two premisses but 
this ? that to withdraw Theology from the public 
schools is to impair the completeness and to invalidate 
the trustworthiness of all that is actually taught in them. 

But I have been insisting simply on Natural Theology, 
and that, because I wished to carry along with me those 
who were not Catholics, and, again, as being confident, 
that no one can really set himself to master and to 
teach the doctrine of an intelligent Creator in its fulness, 
without going on a great deal farther than he at present 
dreams. I say, then, secondly : if this Science, even 
as human reason may attain to it, has such claims on 
the regard, and enters so variously into the objects, of 
the Professor of Universal Knowledge, how can any 
Catholic imagine that it is possible for him to cultivate 
Philosophy and Science with due attention to their 
ultimate end, which is Truth, supposing that system of 
revealed facts and principles, which constitutes the 
Catholic Faith, which goes so far beyond nature, and 



76 /iisfoitrs? ///. 

which he knows to be most true, be omitted from among 
the subjects of his teaching ? 

In a word, Religious Truth is not only a portion, but 
a condition of general knowledge. To blot it out is 
nothing short, if I may so speak, of unravelling the web 
of University Teaching. It is, according to the Greek- 
proverb, to take the Spring from out of the year ; it is 
to imitate the preposterous proceeding of those trage 
dians who represented a drama with the omission of its 
principal part. 



DISCOURSE IV. 

BEARING OF OTHER BRANCHES OF KNOWLEDGE ON 
THEOLOGY. 

I. 

NOTHING is more common in the world at large 
than to consider the resistance, made on the part 
of religious men, especially Catholics, to the separation 
of Secular Education from Religion, as a plain token 
that there is some real contrariety between human science 
and Revelation. To the multitude who draw this infer 
ence, it matters not whether the protesting parties avow 
their belief in this contrariety or not ; it is borne in upon 
the many, as if it were self-evident, that religious men 
would not thus be jealous and alarmed about Science, 
did they not feel instinctively, though they may not 
recognize it, that knowledge is their born enemy, and 
that its progress, if it is not arrested, will be certain to 
destroy all that they hold venerable and dear. It looks 
to the world like a misgiving on our part similar to that 
which is imputed to our refusal to educate by means of 
the Bible only ; why should you dread the sacred text, 
men say, if it be not against you ? And in like man 
ner, why should you dread secular education, except 
that it is against you ? Why impede the circulation 
of books which take religious views opposite to your 
own ? Why forbid your children and scholars the free 



72 Dtscoxrst II . 

perusal of poems or tales or essays or other light 
literature which you fear would unsettle their minds? 
Why oblige them to know these persons and to shun 
those, if you think that your friends have reason on their 
side as fully as your opponents ? Truth is bold and un 
suspicious ; want of self-reliance is the mark of false 
hood. 

Now, as far as this objection relates to any supposed 
opposition between secular science and divine, which is 
the subject on which I am at present engaged, I made a 
sufficient answer to it in my foregoing Discourse. In it 
I said, that, in order to have possession of truth at all, 
we must have the whole truth ; and no one science, no 
two sciences, no one family of sciences, nay, not even all 
secular science, is the whole truth ; that revealed truth 
enters to a very great extent into the province of 
science, philosophy, and literature, and that to put it on 
one side, in compliment to secular science, is simply, 
under colour of a compliment, to do science a great 
damage. I do not say that every science will be equally 
affected by the omission ; pure mathematics will not 
suffer at all ; chemistry will suffer less than politics, 
politics than history, ethics, or metaphysics ; still, that 
the various branches of science are intimately connected 
with each other, and form one whole, which whole is im 
paired, and to an extent which it is difficult to limit, by 
any considerable omission of knowledge, of whatever 
kind, and that revealed knowledge is very far indeed 
from an inconsiderable department of knowledge, this I 
consider undeniable. As the written and unwritten word 
of God make up Revelation as a whole, and the written, 
taken by itself, is but a part of that whole, so in turn 
Revelation itself may be viewed as one of the constituent 
parts of human knowledge, considered as a whole, and 



Bearing of Other Knowledge on Theology. 73 

its omission is the omission of one of those constituent 
parts. Revealed Religion furnishes facts to the other 
sciences, which those sciences, left to themselves, would 
never reach ; and it invalidates apparent facts, which, 
left to themselves, they would imagine. Thus, in the 
science of history, the preservation of our race in Noah's 
ark is an historical fact, which history never would 
arrive at without Revelation ; and, in the province of 
physiology and moral philosophy, our race's progress 
and perfectibility is a dream, because Revelation con 
tradicts it, whatever may be plausibly argued in its be 
half by scientific inquirers. It is not then that Catho 
lics are afraid of human knowledge, but that they are 
proud of divine knowledge, and that they think the 
omission of any kind of knowledge whatever, human or 
divine, to be, as far as it goes, not knowledge, but 
ignorance. 

2. 

Thus I anticipated the objection in question last week: 
now I am going to make it the introduction to a further 
view of the relation of secular knowledge to divine. I 
observe, then, that, if you drop any science out of the 
circle of knowledge, you cannot keep its place vacant for 
it ; that science is forgotten ; the other sciences close 
up, or, in other words, they exceed their proper bounds, 
and intrude where they have no right. For instance, I 
suppose, if ethics were sent into banishment, its territory 
would soon disappear, under a treaty of partition, as it 
may be called, between law, political economy, and 
physiology ; what, again, would become of the pro 
vince of experimental science, if made over to the Anti 
quarian Society ; or of history, if surrendered out and 
out to Metaphysicians ? The case is the same with the 



74 Discourse IV. 

subject-matter of Theology ; it would be the prey of a 
dozen various sciences, if Theology were put out of 
possession ; and not only so, but those sciences would 
be plainly exceeding their rights and their capacities in 
seizing upon it. They would be sure to teach wrongly, 
where they had no mission to teach at all. The enemies 
of Catholicism ought to be the last to deny this : for they 
have never been blind to a like usurpation, as they have 
called it, on the part of theologians ; those who accuse 
us of wishing, in accordance with Scripture language, to 
make the sun go round the earth, are not the men to 
deny that a science which exceeds its limits falls into 
error. 

I neither then am able nor care to deny, rather I 
assert the fact, and to-day I am going on to account for 
it, that any secular science, cultivated exclusively, may 
become dangerous to Religion ; and I account for it on 
this broad principle, that no science whatever, however 
comprehensive it may be, but will fall largely into error, 
if it be constituted the sole exponent of all things in 
heaven and earth, and that, for the simple reason that it 
is encroaching on territory not its own, and undertaking 
problems which it has no instruments to solve. And I 
set off thus : 

3- 

One of the first acts of the human mind is to take 
hold of and appropriate v/hat meets the senses, and here 
in lies a chief distinction between man's and a brute's use 
of them. Brutes gaze on sights, they are arrested by 
sounds ; and what they see and what they hear are 
mainly sights and sounds only. The intellect of man, 
on the contrary, energizes as well as his eye or ear, and 
perceives in sights and sounds something beyond them. 



Bearing of Other Knowledge on Theology. 75 

It seizes and unites what the senses present to it ; it 
grasps and forms what need not have been seen or 
heard except in its constituent parts. It discerns in lines 
and colours, or in tones, what is beautiful and what i.s 
not. It gives them a meaning, and invests them with 
an idea. It gathers up a succession of notes into the 
expression of a whole, and calls it a melody ; it has a 
keen sensibility towards angles and curves, lights and 
shadows, tints and contours. It distinguishes between 
rule and exception, between accident and design. It 
assigns phenomena to a general law, qualities to a subject, 
acts to a principle, and effects to a cause. In a word, 
it philosophizes ; for I suppose Science and Philosophy, 
in their elementary idea, are nothing else but this habit 
of viewing, as it may be called, the objects which sense 
conveys to the mind, of throwing them into system, and 
uniting and stamping them with one form. 

This method is so natural to us, as I have said, as to be 
almost spontaneous ; and we are impatient when we can 
not 'exercise it, and in consequence we do not always 
wait to have the means of exercising it aright, but we 
often put up with insufficient or absurd views or inter 
pretations of what we meet with, rather than have none 
at all. We refer the various matters which are brought 
home to us, material or moral, to causes which we happen 
to know of, or to such as are simply imaginary, sooner 
than refer them to nothing; and according to the activity 
of our intellect do we feel a pain and begin to fret, if we 
are not able to do so. Here we have an explanation of 
the multitude of off-hand sayings, flippant judgments, 
and shallow generalizations, with which the world 
abounds. Not from self-will only, nor from malevolence, 
but from the irritation which suspense occasions, is the 
mind forced on to pronounce, without sufficient data for 



76 DtscoUfSi 11 . 



pronouncing, Who does not form some view or other, 
for instance, of any public man, or any public event, nay, 
even so far in some cases as to reach the mental delinea 
tion of his appearance or of its scene ? yet how few have 
a right to form any view. Hence the misconceptions of 
character, hence the false impressions and reports of words 
or deeds, which are the rule, rather than the exception, 
in the world at large ; hence the extravagances of un 
disciplined talent, and the narrowness of conceited igno 
rance; because, though it is no easy matter to view things 
correctly, nevertheless the busy mind will ever be viewing. 
We cannot do without a view, and we put up with an 
illusion, when we cannot get a truth. 

4- 

Now, observe how this impatience acts in matters of 
research and speculation. What happens to the ignorant 
and hotheaded, will take place in the case of every person 
whose education or pursuits are contracted, whether they 
be merely professional, merely scientific, or of whatever 
other peculiar complexion. Men, whose life lies in the 
cultivation of one science, or the exercise of one method 
of thought, have nc more right, though they have often 
more ambition, to generalize upon the basis of their own 
pursuit but beyond its range, than the schoolboy or the 
ploughman to judge of a Prime Minister. But they must 
have something to say on every subject ; habit, fashion, 
the public require it of them : and, if so, they can only 
give sentence according to their knowledge. You might 
think this ought to make such a person modest in his enun 
ciations; not so: too often it happens that, in proportion 
to the narrowness of his knowledge, is, not his distrust 
of it, but the deep hold it has upon him, his absolute 
conviction of his own conclusions, and his positiveness in 



Bearing of Other Knowledge on Theology. 77 

maintaining them. He has the obstinacy of the bigot, 
whom he scorns, without the bigot's apology, that he has 
been taught, as he thinks, his doctrine from heaven. 
Thus he becomes, what is commonly called, a man of one 
idea ; which properly means a man of one science, and 
of the view, partly true, but subordinate, partly false, 
which is all that can proceed out of any thing so partial. 
Hence it is that we have the principles of utility, of 
combination, of progress, of philanthropy, or, in material 
sciences, comparative anatomy, phrenology, electricity, 
exalted into leading ideas, and keys, if not of all know 
ledge, at least of many things more than belong to them, 
principles, all of them true to a certain point, yet all 
degenerating into error and quackery, because they are 
carried to excess, viz. at the point where they require 
interpretation and restraint from other quarters, and 
because they are employed to do what is simply too 
much for them, inasmuch as a little science is not deep 
philosophy. 

Lord Bacon has set down the abuse, of which I am 
speaking, among the impediments to the Advancement 
of the Sciences, when he observes that " men have used 
to infect their meditations, opinions, and doctrines, with 
some conceits which they have most admired, or some 
Sciences which they have most applied ; and give all things 
else a tincture according to them utterly untrue and im 
proper. ... So have the alchemists made a philo 
sophy out of a few experiments of the furnace ; and 
Gilbertus, our countryman, hath made a philosophy out 
of the observations of a lodestone. So Cicero, when, 
reciting the several opinions of the nature of the soul, he 
found a musician that held the soul was but a harmony, 
saith pleasantly, ' hie ab arte sua non recessit,' ' he was 
true to his art' But of these conceits Aristotle speaketh 



78 Discourse IV. 

seriously and wisely when he saith, 'Qui respiciunt 
ad pauca, de facili pronunciant,' ' they who contemplate 
a few things have no difficulty in deciding.' " 

5. 

And now I have said enough to explain the incon 
venience which 1 conceive necessarily to result from a 
refusal to recognize theological truth in a course of 
Universal Knowledge ; it is not only the loss of Theo 
logy, it is the perversion of other sciences. What it 
unjustly forfeits, others unjustly seize. They have their 
own department, and, in going out of it, attempt to do 
what they really cannot do ; and that the more mis 
chievously, because they do teach what in its place is 
true, though when out of its place, perverted or carried to 
excess, it is not true. And, as every man has not the 
capacity of separating truth from falsehood, they per 
suade the world of what is false by urging upon it what 
is true. Nor is it open enemies alone who encounter us 
here, sometimes it is friends, sometimes persons who, if 
not friends, at least have no wish to oppose Religion, and 
are not conscious they are doing so ; and it will carry 
out my meaning more fully if 1 give some illustrations 
of it. 

As to friends, 1 may take as an instance the cultivation 
of the Fine Arts, Painting, Sculpture, Architecture, to 
which 1 may add Music. These high ministers of the 
Beautiful and the Noble are, it is plain, special attendants 
and handmaids of Religion ; but it is equally plain that 
they are apt to forget their place, and, unless restrained 
with a firm hand, instead of being servants, will aim at 
becoming principals. Here lies the advantage, in an 
ecclesiastical point of view, of their more rudimental 
slate, I mean of the ancient style of architecture, of Gothic 



Bearing of Other Knowledge on Theology. 70 

sculpture and painting, and of what is called Gregorian 
music, that these inchoate sciences have so little innate 
vigour and life in them, that they are in no danger of 
going out of their place, and giving the law to Religion. 
But the case is very different when genius has breathed 
upon their natural elements, and has developed them 
into what I may call intellectual powers. When Paint 
ing, for example, grows into the fulness of its function as 
a simply imitative art, it at once ceases to be a dependant 
on the Church. It has an end of its own, and that of 
earth : Nature is its pattern, and the object it pursues is 
the beauty of Nature, even till it becomes an ideal beauty, 
but a natural beauty still. It cannot imitate that beauty 
of Angels and Saints which it has never seen. At first, 
indeed, by outlines and emblems it shadowed out the 
Invisible, and its want of skill became the instrument of 
reverence and modesty ; but as time went on and it at 
tained its full dimensions as an art, it rather subjected 
Religion to its own ends than ministered to the ends of 
Religion, and in its long galleries and stately chambers, 
did but mingle adorable figures and sacred histories with 
a multitude of earthly, not to say unseemly forms, which 
the Art had created, borrowing withal a colouring and a 
character from that bad company. Not content with 
neutral ground for its development, it was attracted by 
the sublimity of divine subjects to ambitious and hazar 
dous essays. Without my saying a word more, you will 
clearly understand, Gentlemen, that under these circum 
stances Religion was bound to exert itself, that the world 
might not gain an advantage over it. Put out of sight 
the severe teaching of Catholicism in the schools of Paint 
ing, as men now would put it aside in their philosophical 
studies, and in no long time you would have the hierarchy 
of the Church, the Anchorite and Virgin-martyr, the 



8o Discourse IV. 

Confessor and the Doctor, the Angelic Hosts, the 
Mother of God, the Crucifix, the Eternal Trinity, sup 
planted by a sort of pagan mythology in the guise of 
sacred names, by a creation indeed of high genius, ot 
intense, and dazzling, and soul-absorbing beauty, in 
which, however, there was nothing which subserved the 
cause of Religion, nothing on the other hand which did 
not directly or indirectly minister to corrupt nature and 
the powers of darkness. 

6. 

The art of Painting, however, is peculiar : Music and 
Architecture are more ideal, and their respective arche 
types, even if not supernatural, at least are abstract and 
unearthly ; and yet what I have been observing about 
Painting, holds, I think, analogously, in the marvellous 
development which Musical Science has undergone in 
the last century. Doubtless here too the highest genius 
may be made subservient to Religion ; here too, still 
more simply than in the case of Painting, the Science 
has a field of its own, perfectly innocent, into which 
Religion does not and need not enter; on the other 
hand here also, in the case of Music as of Painting, it is 
certain that Religion must be alive and on the defensive, 
for, if its servants sleep, a potent enchantment will steal 
over it. Music, I suppose, though this is not the place 
to enlarge upon it, has an object of its own ; as mathe 
matical science also, it is the expression of ideas greater 
and more profound than any in the visible world, ideas. 
which centre indeed in Him whom Catholicism mani 
fests, who is the seat of all beauty, order, and perfection 
whatever, still ideas after all which are not those on 
which Revelation directly and principally fixes our gaze. 
Jf then a great master in this mysterious science (if I 



Bearing of Other Knowledge on Theology. 8 1 

may speak of matters which seem to lie out of my own 
province) throws himself on his own gift, trusts its in 
spirations, and absorbs himself in those thoughts which, 
though they come to him in the way of nature, belong 
to things above nature, it is obvious he will neglect 
everything else. Rising in his strength, he will break 
through the trammels of words, he will scatter human 
voices, even the sweetest, to the winds ; he will be borne 
upon nothing less than the fullest flood of sounds which 
art has enabled him to draw from mechanical contri 
vances ; he will go forth as a giant, as far as ever his in 
struments can reach, starting from their secret depths 
fresh and fresh elements of beauty and grandeur as he 
goes, and pouring them together into still more marvel 
lous and rapturous combinations ; and well indeed and 
lawfully, while he keeps to that line which is his own ; 
but, should he happen to be attracted, as he well may, 
by the sublimity, so congenial to him, of the Catholic 
doctrine and ritual, should he engage in sacred themes, 
should he resolve by means of his art to do honour to 
the Mass, or the Divine Office, (he cannot have a more 
pious, a better purpose, and Religion will gracefully 
accept what he gracefully offers ; but) is it not certain, 
from the circumstances of the case, that he will be 
carried on rather to use Religion than to minister to it, 
unless Religion is strong on its own ground, and reminds 
him that, if he would do honour to the highest of 
subjects, he must make himself its scholar, must humbly 
follow the thoughts given him, and must aim at the 
glory, not of his own gift, but of the Great Giver ? 



As to Architecture, it is a remark, if I recollect aright 

o 

both of Fenelon and Berkeley, men so different, that it 

6 



82 Discourse /K 

carries more with it even than the names of those cele 
brated men, that the Gothic style is not as simple as 
befits ecclesiastical structures. I understand this to be 
a similar judgment, to that which I have been passing 
on the cultivation of Painting and Music. For myself, 
certainly I think that that style which, whatever be its 
origin, is called Gothic, is endowed with a profound and 
a commanding beauty, such as no other style possesses 
with which we are acquainted, and which probably the 
Church will not see surpassed till it attain to the Celestial 
City. No other architecture, now used for sacred pur 
poses, seems to be the growth of an idea, whereas the 
Gothic style is as harmonious and as intellectual as it is 
graceful. But this feeling should not blind us, rather it 
should awaken us, to the danger lest what is really a 
divine gift be incautiously used as an end rather than as 
a means. It is surely quite within the bounds of pos 
sibility, that, as the renaissance three centuries ago 
carried away its own day, in spite of the Church, into 
excesses in literature and art, so that revival of an almost 
forgotten architecture, which is at present taking place 
in our own countries, in France, and in Germany, may 
in some way or other run away with us into this or that 
error, unless we keep a watch over its course. I am not 
speaking of Ireland ; but to English Catholics at least it 
would be a serious evil, if it came as the emblem and 
advocate of a past ceremonial or an extinct nationalism. 
We are not living in an age of wealth and loyalty, of 
pomp and stateliness, of time-honoured establishments, 
of pilgrimage and penance, of hermitages and convents 
in the wild, and of fervent populations supplying the 
want of education by love, and apprehending in form 
and symbol what they cannot read in books. Our rules 
and our rubrics have been altered now to meet the 



fccaring of Otlur Knowledge on Theology. 83 

times, and hence an obsolete discipline may be a 

present heresy. 

^. 

8. 

I have been pointing out how the Fine Arts may pre 
judice Religion, by laying down the law in cases where 
they should be subservient. The illustration is analo 
gous rather than strictly proper to my subject, yet I 
think it is to the point. If then the most loyal and 
dutiful children of the Church must deny themselves, 
and do deny themselves, when they would sanctify to a 
heavenly purpose sciences as sublime and as divine as 
any which are cultivated by fallen man, it is not wonder 
ful, when we turn to sciences of a different character, of 
which the object is tangible and material, and the 
principles belong to the Reason, not to the Imagination, 
that we should find their disciples, if disinclined to the 
Catholic Faith, acting the part of opponents to it, and 
that, as may often happen, even against their will and 
intention. Many men there are, who, devoted to one 
particular subject of thought, and making its principles 
the measure of all things, become enemies to Revealed 
Religion before they know it, and, only as time proceeds, 
are aware of their own state of mind. These, if they 
are writers or lecturers, while in this state of unconscious 
or semi-conscious unbelief, scatter infidel principles under 
the garb and colour of Christianity ; and this, simply 
because they have made their own science, whatever it 
is, Political Economy, or Geology, or Astronomy, to the 
neglect of Theology, the centre of all truth, and view 
every part or the chief parts of knowledge as if de 
veloped from it, and to be tested and determined by its 
principles. Others, though conscious to themselves of 
their anti-christian opinions, have too much good feeling 



&4 Discourse 

and good taste to obtrude them upon the world. They 
neither wish to shock people, nor to earn for themselves 
a confessorship which brings with it no gain. They 
know the strength of prejudice, and the penalty of in 
novation ; they wish to go through life quietly ; they 
scorn polemics ; they shrink, as from a real humiliation, 
from being mixed up in religious controversy ; they are 
ashamed of the very name. However, they have had 
occasion at some time to publish on some literary or 
scientific subject ; they have wished to give no offence ; 
but after all, to their great annoyance, they find when 
they least expect it, or when they have taken consider 
able pains to avoid it, that they have roused by their 
publication what they would style the bigoted and 
bitter hostility of a party. This misfortune is easily 
conceivable, and has befallen many a man. Before he 
knows where he is, a cry is raised on all sides of him ; 
and so little does he know what we may call the lie of 
the land, that his attempts at apology perhaps only 
make matters worse. In other words, an exclusive line 
of study has led him, whether he will or no, to run 
counter to the principles of Religion ; which principles 
he has never made his landmarks, and which, whatever 
might be their effect upon himself, at least would have 
warned him against practising upon the faith of others, 
had they been authoritatively held up before him. 

9- 

Instances of this kind are far from uncommon. Men 
who are old enough, will remember the trouble which 
came upon a person, eminent as a professional man in 
London even at that distant day, and still more eminent 
since, in consequence of his publishing a book in which 
he so treated the subject of Comparative Anatomy as 



Bearing of Other Knowledge on Theology. 85 

to seem to deny the immateriality of the soul. I speak 
here neither as excusing nor reprobating sentiments 
about which I have not the means of forming a judg 
ment ; all indeed I have heard of him makes me men 
tion him with interest and respect ; anyhow of this I 
am sure, that if there be a calling which feels its position 
and its dignity to lie in abstaining from controversy and 
in cultivating kindly feelings with men of all opinions, 
it is the medical profession, and I cannot believe that 
the person in question would purposely have raised the 
indignation and incurred the censure of the religious 
public. What then must have been his fault or mistake, 
but that he unsuspiciously threw himself upon his own 
particular science, which is of a material character, and 
allowed it to carry him forward into a subject-matter, 
where it had no right to give the law, viz., that of spiri 
tual beings, which directly belongs to the science of 
Theology ? 

Another instance occurred at a later date. A living 
dignitary of the Established Church wrote a History of 
the Jews ; in which, with what I consider at least bad 
judgment, he took an external view of it, and hence was 
led to assimilate it as nearly as possible to secular his 
tory. A great sensation was the consequence among 
the members of his own communion, from which he still 
suffers. Arguing from the dislike and contempt of pole 
mical demonstrations which that accomplished writer has 
ever shown, I must conclude that he was simply betrayed 
into'a false step by the treacherous fascination of what 
is called the Philosophy of History, which is good in its 
place, but can scarcely be applied in cases where the 
Almighty has superseded the natural laws of society and 
history. From this he would have been saved, had he 
been a Catholic ; but in the Establishment he knew of 



86 Discourse IV. 

no teaching, to which he was bound to defer, which 
might rule that to be false which attracted him by its 
speciousness. 

10. 

i will now take an Instance from another science, and 
u ill use more words about it. Political Economy is the 
science, I suppose, of wealth, a science simply lawful 
and useful, for it is no sin to make money, any more 
than it is a sin to seek honour ; a science at the same 
time dangerous and leading to occasions of sin, as is the 
pursuit of honour too ; and in consequence, if studied by 
itself, and apart from the control of Revealed Truth, 
sure to conduct a speculator to unchristian conclusions. 
Holy Scripture tells us distinctly, that " covetousness," 
or more literally the love of money, " is the root of all 
evils ; " and that " they that would become rich fall into 
temptation ; " and that " hardly shall they that have 
riches enter into the kingdom of God ;" and after draw 
ing the picture of a wealthy and flourishing people, it 
adds, "They have called the people happy that hath 
these things ; but happy is that people whose God is the 
Lord : " while on the other hand it says with equal 
distinctness, " If any will not work, neither let him eat;" 
and, " If any man have not care of his own, and espe 
cially of those of his house, he hath denied the faith, 
and is worse than an infidel." These opposite injunc 
tions are summed up in the wise man's prayer, who says, 
" Give me neither beggary nor riches, give me only the 
necessaries of life." With this most precise view of a 
Christian's duty, viz., to labour indeed, but to labour for 
a. competency for himself and his, and to be jealous of 
\vealth, whether personal or national, the holy Fathers 
are, as might be expected, in simple accordance. 
"Judas," says St. Chrysostom, "was with Him who 



Bearing of Other Knowledge on Theology, 87 

knew not where to lay His head, yet could not restrain 
himself ; and how canst thou hope to escape the con 
tagion without anxious effort ? " " It is ridiculous," says 
St. Jerome, " to call it idolatry to offer to the creature 
the grains of incense that are due to God, and not to 
call it so, to offer the whole service of one's life to the 
creature." "There is not a trace of justice in that 
heart," says St. Leo, "in which the love of gain has 
made itself a dwelling." The same thing is emphatically 
taught us by the counsels of perfection, and by every 
holy monk and nun anywhere, who has ever embraced 
them ; but it is needless to collect testimonies, when 
Scripture is so clear. 

Now, observe, Gentlemen, my drift in setting Scripture 
and the Fathers over against Political Economy. Of 
course if there is a science of wealth, it must give rules 
for gaining wealth and disposing of wealth, and can do no 
thing more ; it cannot itself declare that it is a subordi 
nate science, that its end is not the ultimate end of all 
things, and that its conclusions are only hypothetical, 
depending on its premisses, and liable to be overruled 
by a higher teaching. I do not then blame the Political 
Economist for anything which follows from the very 
idea of his science, from the very moment that it is 
recognized as a science. He must of course direct his 
inquiries towards his end ; but then at the same time it 
must be recollected, that so far he is not practical, but 
only pursues an abstract study, and is busy himself in 
establishing logical conclusions from indisputable pre 
misses. Given that wealth is to be sought, this and 
that is the method of gaining it. This is the extent to 
which a Political Economist has a right to go ; he has 
no right to determine that wealth is at any rate to be 
sought, or that it is the way to be virtuous and the price 



88 Discourse 11'. 

of happiness ; I say, this is to pass the bounds of his 
science, independent of the question whether he be 
right or wrong in so determining, for he is only con 
cerned with an hypothesis. 

To take a parallel* case : a physician may tell you, 
that if you are to preserve your health, you must give 
up your employment and retire to the country. He 
distinctly says "if;" that is all in which he is concerned, 
he is no judge whether there are objects dearer to you, 
more urgent upon you, than the preservation of your 
health ; he does not enter into your circumstances, your 
duties, your liabilities, the persons dependent on you ; 
he knows nothing about what is advisable or what is 
not ; he only says, " I speak as a physician ; if you 
would be well, give up your profession, your trade, 
your office, whatever it is." However he may wish it, it 
would be impertinent in him to say more, unless indeed 
he spoke, not as a physician but as a friend ; and it 
would be extravagant, if he asserted that bodily health 
was the summum bonum, and that no one could be 
virtuous whose animal system was not in good order. 

II. 

But now let us turn to the teaching of the actual 
Political Economist, in his present fashionable .shape. I 
will take a very favourable instance of him : he shall be 
represented by a gentleman of high character, whose 
religious views are sufficiently guaranteed to us by his 
being the special choice, in this department of science, 
of a University removed more than any other Protes 
tant body of the day from sordid or unchristian princi 
ples on the. subject of money-making. I say, if there 
be a place where Political Economy would be kept in 
order, and would not be suffered to leave the high road 



Bearing of Other Knowledge on Theology. 89 

and ride across the pastures and the gardens dedicated 
to other studies, it is the University of Oxford. And if 
a man could anywhere be found who would have too 
much good taste to offend the religious feeling of the 
place, or to say any thing which he would himself allow 
to be inconsistent with Revelation, I conceive it is the 
person whose temperate and well-considered composi 
tion, as it would be generally accounted, I am going to 
offer to your notice. Nor did it occasion any excite 
ment whatever on the part of the academical or the re 
ligious public, as did the instances which I have hitherto 
been adducing. I am representing then the science of 
Political Economy, in its independent or unbridled 
action, to great advantage, when I select, as its specimen, 
the Inaugural Lecture upon it, delivered in the Univer 
sity in question, by its first Professor. Yet with all these 
circumstances in its favour, you will soon see, Gentlemen, 
into what extravagance, for so I must call it, a grave 
lawyer is led in praise of his chosen science, merely 
from the circumstance that he has fixed his mind upon 
it, till he has forgotten there are subjects of thought 
higher and more heavenly than it. You will find be 
yond mistake, that it is his object to recommend the 
science of wealth, by claiming for it an ethical quality, 
viz., by extolling it as the road to virtue and happi 
ness, whatever Scripture and holy men may say to the 
contrary. 

He begins by predicting of Political Economy, that 
in the course of a very few years, " it will rank in public 
estimation among the first of moral sciences in interest 
and in utility." Then he explains most lucidly its 
objects and duties, considered as " the science which 
teaches in what wealth consists, by what agents it is 
produced, and according to what laws it is distributed. 



go Discourse IV. 

and what are the institutions and customs by which pro 
duction may be facilitated and distribution regulated, so 
as to give the largest possible amount of wealth to each 
individual." And he dwells upon the interest which 
attaches to the inquiry, " whether England has run her 
full career of wealth and improvement, but stands safe 
where she is, or whether to remain stationary is impos 
sible." After this he notices a certain objection, which 
I shall set before you in his own words, as they will 
furnish me with the illustration I propose. 

This objection, he says, is, that, " as the pursuit of 
wealth is one of the humblest of human occupations, 
far inferior to the pursuit of virtue, or of knowledge, or 
even of reputation, and as the possession of wealth is 
not necessarily joined, perhaps it will be said, is not 
conducive, to happiness, a science, of which the only 
subject is wealth, cannot claim to rank as the first, or 
nearly the first, of moral sciences."* Certainly, to an 
enthusiast in behalf of any science whatever, the temp 
tation is great to meet an objection urged against its 
dignity and worth ; however, from the very form of it, 
such an objection cannot receive a satisfactory answer 
by means of the science itself. It is an objection exter 
nal to the science, and reminds us of the truth of Lord 
Bacon's remark, " No perfect discovery can be made 
upon a flat or a level ; neither is it possible to discover 
the more remote and deeper parts of any science, if you 
stand upon the level of the science, and ascend not to a 
higher science." ~\ The objection that Political Economy 
is inferior to the science of virtue, or does not con 
duce to happiness, is an ethical or theological objection ; 
the question of its " rank " belongs to that Architectonic 

* Introd. Lecture on Pol. Econ. pp. II, 12. 
f Advancement of Learning. 



Bearing of Other Knowledge on Theology. 9 1 

Science or Philosophy, whatever it be, which is itself the 
arbiter of all truth, and which disposes of the claims 
and arranges the places of all the departments of know 
ledge which man is able to master. I say, when an 
opponent of a particular science asserts that it does 
not conduce to happiness, and much more when its 
champion contends in reply that it certainly does con 
duce to virtue, as this author proceeds to contend, the 
obvious question which occurs to one to ask is, what 
does Religion, what does Revelation, say on the point ? 
Political Economy must not be allowed to give judg 
ment in its own favour, but must come before a higher 
tribunal. The objection is an appeal to the Theologian; 
however, the Professor does not so view the matter ; he 
does not consider it a question for Philosophy ; nor in 
deed on the other hand a question for Political Economy ; 
not a question for Science at all ; but for Private Judg 
ment, so he answers it himself, and as follows : 

12. 

"My answer," he says, "is, first, that the pursuit of 
wealth, that is, the endeavour to accumulate the means of 
future subsistence and enjoyment, is, to the mass of 
mankind, the great source of moral improvement." Now 
observe, Gentlemen, how exactly this bears out what I have 
been saying. It is just so far true, as to be able to instil 
what is false, far as the author was from any such design. 
I grant, then, that, ordinarily, beggary is not the means of 
moral improvement ; and that the orderly habits which 
attend upon the hot pursuit of gain, not only may effect 
an external decency, but may at least shelter the soul 
from the temptations of vice. Moreover, these habits of 
good order guarantee regularity in a family or household, 
and thus are accidentally the means of good ; moreover, 



92 Discourse IV. 

they lead to the education of its younger branches, and 
they thus accidentally provide the rising generation with 
a virtue or a truth which the present has not : but with 
out going into these considerations, further than to allow 
them generally, and under circumstances, let us rather 
contemplate what the author's direct assertion is. He 
says," the endeavour to accumulate" the words should be 
weighed, and for what? " for enjoyment ; " " to accumu 
late the means of future subsistence and enjoyment, is, to 
the mass of mankind, the great source," not merely a 
source, but the great source, and of what ? of social and 
political progress ? such an answer would have been 
more within the limits of his art, no, but of something 
individual and personal, " of moral improvement? The 
soul, in the case of " the mass of mankind," improves in 
moral excellence from this more than any thing else, viz., 
from heaping up the means of enjoying this world in 
time to come ! I really should on every account be 
sorry, Gentlemen, to exaggerate, but indeed one is taken 
by surprise, one is startled, on meeting with so very 
categorical a contradiction of our Lord, St. Paul, St. 
Chrysostom, St. Leo, and all Saints. 

" No institution," he continues, " could be more bene 
ficial to the morals of the lower orders, that is, to at least 
nine-tenths of the whole body of any people, than one 
which should increase their power and their wish to 
accumulate ; none more mischievous than one which 
should diminish their motives and means to save." No 
institution more beneficial than one which should increase 
the wish to accumulate ! then Christianity is not one of 
such beneficial institutions, for it expressly says, " Lay 
not up to yourselves treasures on earth . . . for where 
thy treasure is, there is thy heart also ;" no institution 
more mischievous than one which should diminish the 



Bearing of Other Knowledge on Theology. 93 

motives to save! then Christianity is one of such mischiefs, 
for the inspired text proceeds, " Lay up to yourselves 
treasures in heaven, where neither the rust nor the moth 
doth consume, and where thieves do not dig through, 
nor steal." 

But it is not enough that morals and happiness are 
made to depend on gain and accumulation ; the practice 
of Religion is ascribed to these causes also, and in the 
following way. Wealth depends upon the pursuit of 
wealth ; education depends upon wealth ; knowledge 
depends on education ; and Religion depends on know 
ledge ; therefore Religion depends on the pursuit of 
wealth. He says, after speaking of a poor and savage 
people, " Such a population must be grossly ignorant. 
The desire of knowledge is one of the last results 
of refinement ; it requires in general to have been im 
planted in the mind during childhood ; and it is absurd 
to suppose that persons thus situated would have the 
power or the will to devote much to the education of 
their children. A further consequence is the absence 
of all real religion ; for the religion of the grossly igno 
rant, if they have any, scarcely ever amounts to more 
than a debasing superstition." * The pursuit of gain 
then is the basis of virtue, religion, happiness ; though 
it is all the while, as a Christian knows, the " root 
of all evils," and the " poor on the contrary are blessed, 
for theirs is the kingdom of God." 

As to the argument contained in the logical Sorites 
which I have been drawing out, I anticipated just now 
what I should say to it in reply. I repeat, doutbtless 
" beggary," as the wise man says, is not desirable ; doubt 
less, if men will not work, they should not eat ; there is 
doubtless a sense in which it may be said that mere 

* Intr. Lect., p. 16. 



Q4 Discourse 

social or political virtue tends to moral and religious 
excellence ; but the sense needs to be defined and the 
statement to be kept within bounds. This is the very 
point on which I am all along insisting. I am not 
denying, I am granting, I am assuming, that there is 
reason and truth in the " leading ideas," as they are 
called, and " large views " of scientific men ; I only 
say that, though they speak truth, they do not speak the 
whole truth ; that they speak a narrow truth, and think it 
a broad truth ; that their deductions must be compared 
with other truths, which are acknowledged to be truths, 
in order to verify, complete, and correct them. They say 
what is true, exceptis excipiendis ; what is true, but 
requires guarding ; true, but must not be ridden too 
hard, or made what is called a hobby ; true, but not the 
measure of all things ; true, but if thus inordinately, 
extravagantly, ruinously carried out, in spite of other 
sciences, in spite of Theology, sure to become but a 
great bubble, and to burst. 

13- 

I am getting to the end of this Discourse, before I 
have noticed one tenth part of the instances with which 
I might illustrate the subject of it. Else I should have 
wished especially to have dwelt upon the not unfrequent 
perversion which occurs of antiquarian and historical re 
search, to the prejudice of Theology. It is undeniable 
that the records of former ages are of primary import 
ance in determining Catholic doctrine ; it is undeniable 
also that there is a silence or a contrariety abstractedly 
conceivable in those records, as to an alleged portion of 
that doctrine, which would be sufficient to invalidate its 
claims on our acceptance ; but it is quite as undeniable 
that the existing documentary testimony to Catholicism 



Searing of Other Knowledge on 77ieo/ogy. 95 

and Christianity may be so unduly valued as to be 
made the absolute measure of Revelation, as if no part 
of theological teaching were true which cannot bring its 
express text, as it is called, from Scripture, and authori 
ties from the Fathers or profane writers, whereas there 
are numberless facts in past times which we cannot deny, 
for they are indisputable, though history is silent about 
them. I suppose, on this score, we ought to deny that 
the round towers of this country had any origin, because 
history does not disclose it ; or that any individual came 
from Adam who cannot produce the table of his an 
cestry. Yet Gibbon argues against the darkness at the 
Passion, from the accident that it is not mentioned by 
Pagan historians : as well might he argue against the 
existence of Christianity itself in the first century, be 
cause Seneca, Pliny, Plutarch, the Jewish Mishna, and 
other authorities are silent about it. Protestants argue 
in a parallel way against Transubstantiation, and Arians 
against our Lord's Divinity, viz., on the ground that 
extant writings of certain Fathers do not witness those 
doctrines to their satisfaction : as well might they say 
that Christianity was not spread by the Twelve Apostles, 
because we know so little of their labours. The evidence 
of History, I say, is invaluable in its place ; but, if it as 
sumes to be the sole means of gaining Religious Truth, 
it goes beyond its place. We are putting it to a larger 
office than it can undertake, if we countenance the 
usurpation ; and we are turning a true guide and bless 
ing into a source of inexplicable difficulty and inter 
minable doubt. 

And so of other sciences : just as Comparative Ana 
tomy, Political Economy, the Philosophy of History, and 
the Science of Antiquities may be and are turned 
against Religion, by being taken by themselves, as 1 



C)6 Discourse IV. 

have been showing, so a like mistake may befall any 
other. Grammar, for instance, at first sight does not 
appear to admit of a perversion ; yet Home Tooke 
made it the vehicle of his peculiar scepticism. Law 
would seem to have enough to do with its own clients, and 
their affairs ; and yet Mr. Bentham made a treatise on 
Judicial Proofs a covert attack upon the miracles of 
Revelation. And in like manner Physiology may deny 
moral evil and human responsibility ; Geology may deny 
Moses ; and Logic may deny the Holy Trinity ; * and 
other sciences, now rising into notice, are or will be 
victims of a similar abuse. 

14. 

And now to sum up what I have been saying in a few 
words. My object, it is plain, has been not to show 
that Secular Science in its various departments may take 
up a position hostile to Theology ; this is rather the 
basis of the objection with which I opened this Discourse ; 
but to point out the cause of an hostility to which all 
parties will bear witness. I have been insisting then on 
this, that the hostility in question, when it occurs, is 
coincident with an evident deflection or exorbitance of 
Science from its proper course ; and that this exorbi 
tance is sure to take place, almost from the necessity of 
the case, if Theology be not present to defend its own 
boundaries and to hinder the encroachment. The human 
mind cannot keep from speculating and systematizing ; 
and if Theology is not allowed to occupy its own territory, 
adjacent sciences, nay, sciences which are quite foreign to 
Theology, will take possession of it. And this occupation 
is proved to be a usurpation by this circumstance, that 
these foreign sciences will assume certain principles as 

* Vid. AbelrmI, for instance. 



Bearing of Other Knowledge on Theology. 97 

true, and act upon them, which they neither have 
authority to lay down themselves, nor appeal to any 
other higher science to lay down for them. For example, 
it is a mere unwarranted assumption if the Antiquarian 
says, " Nothing has ever taken place but is to be found in 
historical documents ; " or if the Philosophic Historian 
says, " There is nothing in Judaism different from other 
political institutions ; " or if the Anatomist, " There is 
no soul beyond the brain ; " or if the Political Economist. 
" Easy circumstances make men virtuous." These are 
enunciations, not of Science, but of Private Judgment ; 
and it is Private Judgment that infects every science 
which it touches with a hostility to Theology, a hostility 
which properly attaches to no science in itself whatever. 
If then, Gentlemen, I now resist such a course of 
acting as unphilosophical, what is this but to do as men 
of Science do when the interests of their own respective 
pursuits are at stake ? If they certainly would resist the 
divine who determined the orbit of Jupiter by the 
Pentateuch, why am I to be accused of cowardice or 
illiberality, because I will not tolerate their attempt in 
turn to theologize by means of astronomy ? And if ex 
perimentalists would be sure to cry out, did I attempt 
to install the Thomist philosophy in the schools of astro 
nomy and medicine, why may not I, when Divine Science 
is ostracized, and La Place, or Buffon, or Humboldt, sits 
down in its chair, why may not I fairly protest against 
their exclusiveness, and demand the emancipation of 
Theology ? 

15- 

And now I consider I have said enough in proof of 
the first point, which I undertook to maintain, viz. v the 
claim of Theology to be represented among the Chairs 

7 



98 Discourse IV. 

of a University. I have shown, I think, that exclusive- 
ness really attaches, not to those who support that claim, 
but to those who dispute it. I have argued in its behalf, 
first, from the consideration that, whereas it is the very 
profession of a University to teach all sciences, on this 
account it cannot exclude Theology without being untrue 
to its profession. Next, I have said that, all sciences 
being connected together, and having bearings one on 
another, it is impossible to teach them all thoroughly, 
unless they all are taken into account, and Theology 
among them. Moreover, I have insisted on the important 
influence, which Theology in matter of fact does and must 
exercise over a great variety of sciences, completing and 
correcting them ; so that, granting it to be a real science 
occupied upon truth, it cannot be omitted without great 
prejudice to the teaching of the rest. And lastly, I have 
urged that, supposing Theology be not taught, its 
province will not simply be neglected, but will be actually 
usurped by other sciences, which will teach, without 
warrant, conclusions of their own in a subject-matter 
which needs its own proper principles for its due forma 
tion and disposition. 

Abstract statements are always unsatisfactory ; these, 
as I have already observed, could be illustrated at far 
greater length than the time allotted to me for the 
purpose has allowed. Let me hope that I have said 
enough upon the subject to suggest thoughts, which 
those who take an interest in it may pursue for them 
selves, 



99 



DISCOURSE V. 
KNOWLEDGE ITS OWN END. 

A UNIVERSITY may be considered with reference 
either to its Students or to its Studies ; and the 
principle, that all Knowledge is a whole and the sepa 
rate Sciences parts of one, which I have hitherto been 
using in behalf of its studies, is equally important when 
we direct our attention to its students. Now then I 
turn to the students, and shall consider the education 
which, by virtue of this principle, a University will give 
them ; and thus I shall be introduced, Gentlemen, to 
the second question, which I proposed to discuss, viz, 
whether and in what sense its teaching, viewed relatively 
to the taught, carries the attribute of Utility along with it. 

i. 

I have said that all branches of knowledge are con 
nected together, because the subject-matter of knowledge 
is intimately united in itself, as being the acts and the 
work of the Creator. Hence it is that the Sciences, into 
which our knowledge may be said to be cast, have multi 
plied bearings one on another, and an internal sympathy, 
and admit, or rather demand, comparison and adjustment. 
They complete, correct, balance each other. This con 
sideration, if well-founded, must be taken into account, 
not only as regards the attainment of truth, which is 



ioo Discourse V. 

their common end, but as regards *the influence which 
they exercise upon those whose education consists in the 
study of them. I have said already, that to give undue 
prominence to one is to be unjust to another ; to neglect 
or supersede these is to divert those from their proper 
object. It is to unsettle the boundary lines between 
science and science, to disturb their action, to destroy 
the harmony which binds them together. Such a pro 
ceeding will have a corresponding effect when introduced 
into a place of education. There is no science but tells 
a different tale, when viewed as a portion of a whole, 
from what it is likely to suggest when taken by itself, 
without the safeguard, as I may call it, of others. 

Let me make use of an illustration. In the combination 
of colours, very different effects are produced by a 
difference in their selection and juxta-position ; red, green, 
and white, change their shades, according to the contrast 
to which they are submitted. And, in like manner, the 
drift and meaning of a branch of knowledge varies with 
the company in which it is introduced to the student. 
If his reading is confined simply to one subject, howevtr 
such division of labour may favour the advancement of a 
particular pursuit, a point into which I do not here enter, 
certainly it has a tendency to contract his mind. If it is 
incorporated with others, it depends on those others as 
to the kind of influence which it exerts upon him. Thus 
the Classics, which in England are the means of refining 
the taste, have in France subserved the spread of revolu 
tionary and deistical doctrines. In Metaphysics, again, 
Butler's Analogy of Religion, which has had so much to 
do with the conversion to the Catholic faith of members 
of the University of Oxford, appeared to Pitt and others, 
who had received a different training, to operate only in 
the direction of infidelity. And so again, Watson, Bishop 



Knowledge its Own End. tor 

of Llandaff, as I think he tells us in the narrative of his 
life, felt the science of Mathematics to indispose the 
mind to religious belief, while others see in its investiga 
tions the best parallel, and thereby defence, of the Chris 
tian Mysteries. In like manner, I suppose, Arcesilas 
would not have handled logic as Aristotle, nor Aristotle 
have criticized poets as Plato ; yet reasoning and poetry 
are subject to scientific rules. 

It is a great point then to enlarge the range of studies 
which a University professes, even for the sake of the 
students ; and, though they cannot pursue every subject 
which is open to them, they will be the gainers by living 
among those and under those who represent the whole 
circle. This I conceive to be the advantage of a seat of 
universal learning, considered as a place of education. 
An assemblage of learned men, zealous for their own 
sciences, and rivals of each other, are brought, by familiar 
intercourse and for the sake of intellectual peace, to 
adjust together the claims and relations of their respective 
subjects of investigation. They learn to respect, to 
consult, to aid each other. Thus is created a pure and 
clear atmosphere of thought, which the student also 
breathes, though in his own case he only pursues a few 
sciences out of the multitude. He profits by an intel 
lectual tradition, which is independent of particular 
teachers, which guides him in his choice of subjects, and 
duly interprets for him those which he chooses. He 
apprehends the great outlines of knowledge, the principles 
on which it rests, the scale of its parts, its lights and its 
shades, its great points and its little, as he otherwise 
cannot apprehend them. Hence it is that his education 
is called " Liberal." A habit of mind is formed which 
lasts through life, of which the attributes are, freedom, 
equitableness, calmness, moderation, and wisdom ; or 



Discourse l\ 

what in a former Discourse I have ventured to call a 
philosophical habit. This then I would assign as the 
special fruit of the education furnished at a University, 
as contrasted with other places of teaching or modes of 
teaching. This is the main purpose of a University in 
its treatment of its students. 

And now the question is asked me, What is the use 
of it ? and my answer will constitute the main subject of 
the Discourses which are to follow. 

2. 

Cautious and practical thinkers, I say, will ask of me, 
what, after all, is the gain of this Philosophy, of which I 
make such account, and from which I promise so much. 
Even supposing it to enable us to exercise the degree of 
trust exactly due to every science respectively, and to 
estimate precisely the value of every truth which is any 
where to be found, how are we better for this master view 
of things, which I have been extolling ? Does it not re 
verse the principle of the division of labour ? will prac 
tical objects be obtained better or worse by its culti 
vation ? to what then does it lead ? where does it end ? 
what does it do ? how does it profit ? what does it 
promise ? Particular sciences are respectively the basis 
of definite arts, which carry on to results tangible and 
beneficial the truths which are the subjects of the know 
ledge attained ; what is the Art of this science of 
sciences ? what is the fruit of such a Philosophy ? what 
are we proposing to effect, what inducements do we hold 
out to the Catholic community, when we set about the 
enterprise of founding a University ? 

I am asked what is the end of University Education, 
and of the Liberal or Philosophical Knowledge which I 
conceive it to impart : I answer, that what I have already 



Knowledge its Own End. 103 

said has been sufficient to show that it has a very tan 
gible, real, and sufficient end, though the end cannot be 
divided from that knowledge itself. Knowledge is capa 
ble of being its own end. Such is the constitution of the 
human mind, that any kind of knowledge, if it be really 
such, is its own reward. And if this is true of all know 
ledge, it is true also of that special Philosophy, which 
I have made to consist in a comprehensive view of truth 
in all its branches, of the relations of science to science, 
of their mutual bearings, and their respective values. 
What the worth of such an acquirement is, compared 
with other objects which we seek, wealth or power or 
honour or the conveniences and comforts of life, I do not 
profess here to discuss ; but I would maintain, and 
mean to show, that it is an object, in its own nature so 
really and undeniably good, as to be the compensation 
of a great deal of thought in the compassing, and a 
great deal of trouble in the attaining. 

Now, when I say that Knowledge is, not merely a 
means to something beyond it, or the preliminary of 
certain arts into which it naturally resolves, but an end 
sufficient to rest in and to pursue for its own sake, surely 
I am uttering no paradox, for I am stating what is both 
intelligible in itself, and has ever been the common 
judgment of philosophers and the ordinary feeling of 
mankind. I am saying what at least the public opinion 
of this day ought to be slow to deny, considering how 
much we have heard of late years, in opposition to 
Religion, of entertaining, curious, and various knowledge. 
I am but saying what whole volumes have been written 
to illustrate, viz., by a " selection from the records of Phi 
losophy, Literature, and Art, in all ages and countries, 
of a body of examples, to show how the most unpropitious 
circumstances have been unable to conquer an ardent 



lo I Discourse V. 

desire for the acquisition of knowledge." * That further 
advantages accrue to us and redound to others by its 
possession, over and above what it is in itself, I am very 
far indeed from denying ; but, independent of these, we 
arc satisfying a direct need of our nature in its very 
acquisition ; and, whereas our nature, unlike that of the 
inferior creation, does not at once reach its perfection, 
but depends, in order to it, on a number of external aids 
and appliances, Knowledge, as one of the principal of 
these, is valuable for what its very presence in us does 
for us after the manner of a habit, even though it be 
turned to no further account, nor subserve any direct 
end. 

3- 

Hence it is that Cicero, in enumerating the various 
heads of mental excellence, lays down the pursuit of 
Knowledge for its own sake, as the first of them. " This 
pertains most of all to human nature," he says, " for we 
are all of us drawn to the pursuit of Knowledge ; in 
which to excel we consider excellent, whereas to mis 
take, to err, to be ignorant, to be deceived, is both an 
evil and a disgrace." t And he considers Knowledge 
the very first object to which we are attracted, after the 
supply of our physical wants. After the calls and duties 
of our animal existence, as they may be termed, as re 
gards ourselves, our family, and our neighbours, follows, 
he tells us, "the search after truth. Accordingly, as 
soon as we escape from the pressure of necessary cares, 
forthwith we desire to see, to hear, and to learn ; and 
consider the knowledge of what is hidden or is wonder 
ful a condition of our happiness." 

* Pursuit of Knowledge under Difficulties. Introd. 
f Cicer. Offic. ink. 



Knowledge Us Own End. 105 

This passage, though it is but one of many similar 
passages in a multitude of authors, I take for the very 
reason that it is so familiarly known to us ; and I wish 
you to observe, Gentlemen, how distinctly it separates 
the pursuit of Knowledge from those ulterior objects to 
which certainly it can be made to conduce, and which 
are, I suppose, solely contemplated by the persons who 
would ask of me the use of a University or Liberal 
Education. So far from dreaming of the cultivation of 
Knowledge directly and mainly in order to our physical 
comfort and enjoyment, for the sake of life and person, 
of health, of the conjugal and family union, of the social 
tie and civil security, the great Orator implies, that it is 
only after our physical and political needs are supplied, 
and when we are "free from necessary duties and cares," 
that we are in a condition for " desiring to see, to hear, 
and to learn." Nor does he contemplate in the least 
degree the reflex or subsequent action of Knowledge, 
when acquired, upon those material goods which we set 
out by securing before we seek it ; on the contrary, he 
expressly denies its bearing upon social life altogether, 
strange as such a procedure is to those who live after the 
rise of the Baconian philosophy, and he cautions us 
against such a cultivation of it as will interfere with our 
duties to our fellow-creatures. " All these methods," he 
says, " are engaged in the investigation of truth ; by the 
pursuit of which to be carried off from public occupa 
tions is a transgression of duty. For the praise of virtue 
lies altogether in action ; yet intermissions often occur, 
and then we recur to such pursuits ; not to say that the 
incessant activity of the mind is vigorous enough to 
carry us on in the pursuit of knowledge, even without 
any exertion of our own." The idea of benefiting 
society by means of " the pursuit of science and know- 



io6 Discourse V. 

ledge " did not enter at all into the motives which he 
would assign for their cultivation. 

This was the ground of the opposition which the elder 
Cato made to the ^introduction of Greek Philosophy 
among his countrymen, when Carneades and his com 
panions, on occasion of their embassy, were charming 
the Roman youth with their eloquent expositions of it. 
The fit representative of a practical people, Cato esti 
mated every thing by what it produced; whereas the 
Pursuit of Knowledge promised nothing beyond Know 
ledge itself. He despised that refinement or enlargement 
of mind of which he had no experience. 

4- 

Things, which can bear to be cut off from every thing 
else and yet persist in living, must have life in themselves ; 
pursuits, which issue in nothing, and still maintain their 
ground for ages, which are regarded as admirable, though 
they have not as yet proved themselves to be useful, 
must have their sufficient end in themselves, whatever it 
turn out to be. And we are brought to the same con 
clusion by considering the force of the epithet, by which 
the knowledge under consideration is popularly desig 
nated. It is common to speak of " liberal knowledge," 
of the " liberal arts and studies," and of a "/z'^mz/ edu 
cation," as the especial characteristic or property of a 
University and of a gentleman ; what is really meant 
by the word ? Now, first, in its grammatical sense it is 
opposed to servile; and by "servile work" is understood, 
as our catechisms inform us, bodily labour, mechanical 
employment, and the like, in which the mind has little 
or no part. Parallel to such servile works are those arts, 
if they deserve the name, of which the poet speaks,* 



Vid. Arist. Nic. Ethic, vi. 



Knowledge Us Own End. 107 

which owe their origin and their method to hazard, not 
to skill ; as, for instance, the practice and operations of 
an empiric. As far as this contrast may be considered 
as a guide into the meaning of the word, liberal educa 
tion and liberal pursuits are exercises of mind, of reason, 
of reflection. 

But we want something more for its explanation, for 
there are bodily exercises which are liberal, and mental 
exercises which are not so. For instance, in ancient 
times the practitioners in medicine were commonly 
slaves ; yet it was an art as intellectual in its nature, in 
spite of the pretence, fraud, and quackery with which it 
might then, as now, be debased, as it was heavenly in its 
aim. And so in like manner, we contrast a liberal 
education with a commercial education or a professional ; 
yet no one can deny that commerce and the professions 
afford scope for the highest and most diversified powers 
of mind. There is then a great variety of intellectual 
exercises, which are not technically called " liberal ; " on 
the other hand, I say, there are exercises of the body 
which do receive that appellation. Such, for instance, 
was the palaestra, in ancient times ; such the Olympic 
games, in which strength and dexterity of body as well 
as of mind gained the prize. In Xenophon we read of 
the young Persian nobility being taught to ride on horse-, 
back and to speak the truth ; both being among the 
accomplishments of a gentleman. War, too, however 
rough a profession, has ever been accounted liberal, 
unless in cases when it becomes heroic, which would 
introduce us to another subject. 

Now comparing these instances together, we shall 
have no difficulty in determining the principle of this 
apparent variation in the application of the term which 
I am examining. Manly games, or games of skill, or 



io8 Discourse V. 

military prowess, though bodily, are, it seems, accounted 
liberal ; on the other hand, what is merely professional, 
though highly intellectual, nay, though liberal in com 
parison of trade and manual labour, is not simply called 
liberal, and mercantile occupations are not liberal at all. 
Why this distinction ? because that alone is liberal know 
ledge, which stands on its own pretensions, which is 
independent of sequel, expects no complement, refuses 
to be informed (as it is called) by any end, or absorbed 
into any art, in order duly to present itself to our con 
templation. The most ordinary pursuits have this specific 
character, if they are self-sufficient and complete ; the 
highest lose it, when they minister to something beyond 
them. It is absurd to balance, in point of worth and 
importance, a treatise on reducing fractures with a game 
of cricket or a fox-chase ; yet of the two the bodily 
exercise has that quality which we call " liberal," and 
the intellectual has it not. And so of the learned pro 
fessions altogether, considered merely as professions ; 
although one of them be the most popularly beneficial, 
and another the most politically important, and the third 
the most intimately divine of all human pursuits, yet 
the very greatness of their end, the health of the body, 
or of the commonwealth, or of the soul, diminishes, not 
increases, their claim to the appellation " liberal," and 
that still more, if they are cut down to the strict exigen 
cies of that end. If, for instance, Theology, instead of 
being cultivated as a contemplation, be limited to the 
purposes of the pulpit or be represented by the cate 
chism, it loses, not its usefulness, not its divine character, 
not its meritoriousness (rather it gains a claim upon these 
titles by such charitable condescension), but it does lose 
the particular attribute which I am illustrating; just as 
a face worn by tears and fasting loses its beauty, or a 



Knowledge Us Own End 109 

labourer's hand loses its delicateness ; for Theology 
thus exercised is not simple knowledge, but rather is 
an art or a business making use of Theology. And 
thus it appears that even what is supernatural need not 
be liberal, nor need a hero be a gentleman, for the plain 
reason that one idea is not another idea. And in like 
manner the Baconian Philosophy, by using its physical 
sciences in the service of man, does thereby transfer them 
from the order of Liberal Pursuits to, I do not say the 
inferior, but the distinct class of the Useful. And, to 
take a different instance, hence again, as is evident, 
whenever personal gain is the motive, still more distinc 
tive an effect has it upon the character of a given pursuit ; 
thus racing, which was a liberal exercise in Greece, for 
feits its rank in times like these, so far as it is made the 
occasion of gambling. 

All that I have been now saying is summed up in a 
few characteristic words of the great Philosopher. " Of 
possessions," he says, " those rather are useful, which 
bear fruit ; those liberal, which tend to enjoyment. By 
fruitful, I mean, which yield revenue ; by enjoyable, 
where nothing accrues of consequence beyond the using!'* 

5- 

Do not suppose, that in thus appealing to the ancients, 
I am throwing back the world two thousand years, and 
fettering Philosophy with the reasonings of paganism. 
While the world lasts, will Aristotle's doctrine on these 
matters last, for he is the oracle of nature and of truth. 
While we are men, we cannot help, to a great extent, 
being Aristotelians, for the great Master does but analyze 
the thoughts, feelings, views, and opinions of human kind. 
He has told us the meaning of our own words and ideas, 
* Aristot. Rhet. i. ;. 



1 1 o Discourse V. 

before we were born. In many subject-matters, to think 
